588

CLINICAL GUIDELINES

ACG Clinical Guideline: Hepatic Encephalopathy
Jasmohan S. Bajaj, MD, MS, FACG1, Sofia S. Jakab, MD2, Arun B. Jesudian, MD, FACG3, Robert S. Rahimi, MD4,
Andres Duarte-Rojo, MD5, Po-Hung Chen, MD, PhD, FACG6,*, Robert J. Wong, MD, MS, FACG7,*, Elliot B. Tapper, MD8 and
Puneeta Tandon, MD, MSc(Epi)9

Hepatic encephalopathy is a major and burdensome complication of cirrhosis, with significant consequences for patients,
families, and healthcare systems. Its progression from covert to overt disease is not fully reflected in current transplant listing
criteria, leaving many patients inadequately prioritized for transplantation despite substantial impairment in quality of life. This
guideline of the American College of Gastroenterology presents 24 recommendations for the diagnosis, management, and
prevention strategies for hepatic encephalopathy. The Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and
Evaluation process was used to assess the quality of evidence for each statement. Key concepts are also provided for statements
to which the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation process has not been applied.
KEYWORDS: cirrhosis; disorder of gut-brain axis; Bristol Stool scale; liver transplant; caregiver burden; readmission; cognitive testing
ABBREVIATIONS: ACLF, acute on chronic liver failure; AI, artificial intelligence; AKI, acute kidney injury; APRI, AST to Platelet Ratio Index;

AUDIT-C, Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test; BCAA, branched chain amino acids; BM, bowel movements; CHE, covert hepatic
encephalopathy; CPAP, continuous positive airway pressure; CT, computed tomography; DAST, Drug Abuse Screen Test; DDLT, deceased
donor liver transplant; DM, diabetes mellitus; ER, Emergency room; FMT, fecal microbiota transplant; GABA, gamma aminobutyric acid;
GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale; HCC, hepatocellular cancer; HE, hepatic encephalopathy; HEGI, Hepatic Encephalopathy Grading
Instrument; HEST, Hepatic Encephalopathy Staging Tool; HRQoL, health-related quality of life; ICU, intensive care unit; IR, interventional
radiology; ISHEN, international society for hepatic encephalopathy and nitrogen metabolism; LDLT, living donor liver transplant; LES, lateevening snack; LFI, liver frailty index; LOLA, L-ornithine L-aspartate; LT, liver transplant; MAMC, mid arm muscle circumference; MELD,
model for end-stage liver disease; MHE, minimal hepatic encephalopathy; MMSE, mini mental status exam; MMSE, Mini-Mental Status
Examination; MoCA, Montreal Cognitive Assessment; NGT, nasogastric tube; OHE, overt hepatic encephalopathy; OSA, obstructive sleep
apnea; PETH, phosphatidylethanolamine; PHQ, patient health questionnaire; PMI, psoas muscle index; PO, per oral; PROMIS8, PatientReported Outcomes Measurement Information System; PT, physical therapy; PTSD, posttraumatic test disorder; QoL, quality of life; RCT,
randomized controlled trial; RR, relative risk; RRT, renal replacement therapy; SBO, small bowel obstruction; SDU/MICU, step-down/
medical intensive care unit; SPSS, spontaneous porto-systemic shunts; STOP-BANG, (Snore; Tired, Observed apnea; Pressure (high
blood pressure), BMI (.35); Age (.50), Neck circumference (.40cm/17in men, .40cm/16in women), and Gender (male)]; TIPS,
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt; TUG, timed up and go; WH, West Haven
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL accompanies this paper at http://links.lww.com/AJG/D846
Am J Gastroenterol 2026;121:588–618. https://doi.org/10.14309/ajg.0000000000003899; published online March 3, 2026

INTRODUCTION
Under the auspices of the American College of Gastroenterology
(ACG) Practice Parameters Committee, a group of experts in
hepatic encephalopathy (HE) were identiﬁed for the writing
group. The proposed writing group was reviewed by the ACG
Practice Parameters Committee and the ACG leadership, and
the ﬁnal approved writing group consisted of the current
authorship team.

Regular meetings were conducted among this writing group
throughout the guideline development process to formulate
PICO questions that guided the subsequent literature search,
development of recommendation statements and key concepts,
Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and
Evaluation (GRADE) assessments, and the preparation of the full
guideline document. The search strategy was developed and executed in PubMed (MEDLINE) and then adapted to the syntax

1

Virginia Commonwealth University and Richmond VA Medical Center, Richmond, Virginia, USA; 2Yale University and VA CT Medical Center, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA; 3Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New York, USA; 4Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA; 5Northwestern University Medical
Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA; 6Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA; 7Stanford University and Palo Alto VA Medical Center, Palo Alto, California,
USA; 8University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA; 9University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. Correspondence: Jasmohan S. Bajaj, MD, MS, FACG.
E-mail: jasmohan.bajaj@vcuhealth.org.

*GRADE methodology experts.

Received September 9, 2025; accepted December 15, 2025
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

VOLUME 121 | MARCH 2026 www.amjgastro.com

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

ACG Hepatic Encephalopathy Guideline

Table 1. Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation: strength of recommendations, certainty of evidence,
and implications for the patients and clinicians
Strength of recommendation

Criteria

Factors influencing the strength of the recommendation include the certainty of the evidence, clinical and patient-reported outcomes, risk of harm, and costs/
healthcare resource utilization
Strong

Strong recommendations are offered when the desirable effects of an intervention clearly outweigh the
undesirable effects
Implications from a patient and clinician perspective:
Patients: Most individuals in this situation would prefer the recommended course of action and only a small
proportion would choose an alternative
Clinicians: Most patients should receive the recommended course of action or an alternative with similar
strength of recommendation

Conditional

Conditional recommendations are offered when tradeoffs are less certain—either because of low certainty of
evidence or because evidence suggests that desirable and undesirable effects are closely balanced
Implications from a patient and clinician perspective:
Patients: Some individuals would want the suggested course of action whereas others may not. A discussion regarding
pros, cons, and available alternatives is appropriate to reach an individualized patient-specific decision
Clinicians: A shared decision-making model through a discussion regarding the available evidence and
alternative options is appropriate, taking into consideration the values and preferences of the patient

Quality of evidence

Criteria

High

We are very confident that the true effect closely aligns with that of the estimate of the effect

Moderate

We have a moderate level of confidence in the estimate of effect. It is likely that the true effect is close to the
estimate of the effect

Low

Our confidence in the effect estimate is limited. The true effect could differ from the estimate of effect

Very low

We have very little confidence in the estimate effect. The true effect may be substantially different from the
estimate of effect

and controlled vocabulary of Embase and Cochrane Library. The
searches were ﬁltered to fully published articles on human populations in the English language, with a focus on the highest levels
of evidence. Priority was given to systematic reviews and
meta-analyses, followed by randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) whenever available. These guidelines are presented in
the format of statements that were deemed to be clinically
important by the content authors. The GRADE process was
used to assess the quality of evidence for each statement
(Table 1) (1–4). The certainty of evidence is expressed high
(we are conﬁdent in the eﬀect estimate to support a particular
recommendation), moderate, low, or very low (we have very
little conﬁdence in the eﬀect estimate to support a particular
recommendation) based on the risk of bias of the studies,
evidence of publication bias, heterogeneity among studies,
directness of the evidence, and precision of the estimate of
eﬀect (2). A strength of recommendation is given as either
strong (recommendations) or conditional (suggestions)
based on the quality of evidence, risks vs beneﬁts, feasibility,
and costs considering perceived patient-based and
population-based factors (5). Furthermore, a narrative evidence summary for each section provides important deﬁnitions and further details for the data supporting the
statements.
In addition to guideline recommendations, the authors
have highlighted key concept statements that are not included in the GRADE assessment. Key concepts are statements to which the GRADE process has not been applied and
© 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology

can include both expert opinion recommendations and
deﬁnitions/epidemiological statements. Tables 2 and 3 have
the recommendations and key concepts that have also been
displayed in their respective sections below.

BACKGROUND
HE is one of the most impactful complications of cirrhosis (6).
The negative eﬀects are felt by the patients, their families, and the
healthcare systems (7). The progression of HE from the covert to
the overt stage is not completely captured by the current transplant listing criteria, and patients with HE often ﬁnd themselves
in the limbo of not being sick enough to be transplanted and not
well enough to live life to their fullest (8).
The term “hepatic encephalopathy” is an oversimpliﬁcation because the pathogenesis involves several organs and varying precipitants
(7). HE development, as noted above, has manifold negative impacts on
patients, families, and healthcare systems, and as a testament to the
complexity of this syndrome, requires a personalized village to manage
this (9). The 3 villages of HE are noted in Figure 1 (village 1: multiple
pathogenetic factors within the patient; village 2: negative impact on
patients, families, and healthcare systems; and village 3: multiple specialties and practices needed to adequately manage HE).
The deﬁnition of HE in prior American Association for the Study of
Liver Diseases and European Association for the Study of the Liver
Guidelines, which has stood the test of time, is “hepatic encephalopathy
(HE) is brain dysfunction resulting from liver impairment or portosystemic shunting, presenting as a spectrum of neurological and psychiatric
manifestations” (10,11). Implicit in this deﬁnition is (i) HE can occur
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

589

590

Bajaj et al

Table 2. Recommendations
CHE/MHE
1. In patients being evaluated for MHE or CHE, we suggest a single-test strategy over a 2-test combination strategy (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of
evidence)
2. In patients being evaluated for MHE or CHE, we suggest against using serum ammonia levels alone to make the diagnosis (conditional recommendation, very low
certainty of evidence)
3. In patients with MHE/CHE, we suggest treatment with lactulose vs no treatment (conditional recommendation, low certainty of evidence)
4. There is insufficient evidence to recommend for or against routine treatment of MHE/CHE for prevention of OHE (insufficient evidence, no recommendation)
Inpatient management of HE
5. In patients with HE, we suggest against routine testing of serum ammonia to guide HE treatment decisions (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence)
6. In patients with cirrhosis and confusion without new-onset focal neurologic deficits, we suggest against routine brain imaging (conditional recommendation, very low
certainty of evidence)
7. In patients with OHE, we recommend treatment with lactulose to improve patient outcomes and prevent recurrence of OHE episodes (strong recommendation,
moderate certainty of evidence)
8. In patients with OHE, we suggest treatment with high-volume (e.g., 4 L) polyethylene glycol preparations as an alternative option to lactulose therapy (conditional
recommendation, low certainty of evidence)
9. In patients with acute OHE, we suggest adding rifaximin to lactulose therapy vs lactulose therapy alone (conditional recommendation, low certainty of evidence)
Prevention of HE recurrence
10. After an initial episode of OHE, we recommend lactulose titrated to 2–3 soft bowel movements daily as outpatient first-line therapy for prevention of HE recurrence
(strong recommendations, high certainty of evidence)
11. In patients treated with lactulose for HE, we suggest using the Bristol Stool Scale along with bowel movement frequency for the outpatient titration of lactulose to reduce
readmissions (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence)
12. In patients with cirrhosis and OHE, we suggest rifaximin therapy in the outpatient setting to prevent HE recurrence (conditional recommendation, low certainty of
evidence)
13. In patients with OHE on lactulose maintenance therapy who experience recurrent episodes of HE, we recommend addition of rifaximin treatment (strong
recommendation, high certainty of evidence)
14. In patients with OHE and persistent symptoms despite lactulose and rifaximin therapy, we suggest the addition of zinc supplementation in those with low blood zinc
levels (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence)
15. We suggest implementing health information technology interventions, such as the Patient Buddy App or electronic clinical reminders, when feasible, to optimize HE
management (conditional recommendations, very low certainty of evidence)
16. We suggest shunt embolization in patients with refractory HE on optimized medical therapy who have adequate hepatic function and no contraindications (conditional
recommendation, very low certainty of evidence)
Sarcopenia and nutrition
17. We recommend a protein intake target of 1.2–1.5 g/kg/d in outpatients with HE (strong recommendation, moderate certainty of evidence)
18. We recommend BCAA supplementation in individuals with HE if protein needs cannot be met by food alone (strong recommendation, moderate certainty of evidence)
19. We suggest a late-night snack for patients with cirrhosis to reduce frailty and HE (conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence)
20. We suggest against protein restriction in patients with HE because it increases muscle breakdown and does not reduce the duration of HE (conditional
recommendation, very low certainty of evidence)
21. We suggest exercise interventions in patients with HE to reduce the risk for falls, lower portal pressure, and increase the capacity of skeletal muscle for ammonia
metabolism (conditional recommendation, low certainty of evidence)
HE in the context of TIPS
22. We recommend initiating rifaximin therapy 14 d before elective TIPS insertion and continuing for at least 6 mo in patients with decompensated cirrhosis with or without
a prior episode of OHE to decrease the risk of recurrent or de novo OHE (strong recommendation, moderate certainty of evidence)
23. We suggest embolizing extrahepatic collaterals at the time of TIPS to reduce post-TIPS HE (conditional recommendation, low certainty of evidence)
Liver transplant and HE
24. For patients with multiple HE episodes and MELD score ,15, we suggest evaluating candidacy for living donor liver transplantation (conditional recommendation, low
certainty of evidence)
CHE, covert hepatic encephalopathy; MELD, model for end-stage liver disease; MHE, minimal hepatic encephalopathy; OHE, overt hepatic encephalopathy; TIPS,
transjugular portosystemic shunt.

The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

VOLUME 121 | MARCH 2026 www.amjgastro.com

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

ACG Hepatic Encephalopathy Guideline

Table 3. Key concepts
CHE/MHE
1. Given the low reproducibility of clinical diagnosis of CHE (minimal or grade 1 HE), CHE should be defined by excluding OHE (grade 2 or higher) in the appropriate clinical context
2. Isolated asterixis without alterations in behavior or alertness is not enough to diagnose OHE
3. Patients with cirrhosis and 1 or more of the following features could be prioritized for MHE testing:
a. Hypoalbuminemia
b. Decompensated cirrhosis (e.g., presence of ascites, variceal bleeding, or jaundice)
c. Clinically significant portal hypertension or presence of portosystemic shunts
d. Cirrhosis with nonspecific cognitive complaints, difficulties with concentration, impaired quality of life, navigation issues/traffic violations, and falls
e. Difficulty operating heavy machinery
f. Commercial drivers/pilots
4. Since a large proportion of patients with cirrhosis and cognitive complaints could have conditions other than MHE, specific assessments for alternative diagnoses such as sleep apnea, alcohol-related
conditions, and mild cognitive impairment should be performed, ideally in a specialized clinic or through referral, especially in those with isolated delayed memory issues or isolated sleep issues
5. Cognitive testing for CHE/MHE and subsequent therapy with lactulose or rifaximin may improve health-related quality of life
6. In patients with cirrhosis being evaluated for MHE or CHE, several testing options are available according to availability of local expertise and norms: psychometric hepatic encephalopathy score, Stroop
EncephalApp, QuickStroop, animal naming test, inhibitory control test, continuous reaction time, and critical flicker frequency
7. A second-line agent could be considered for treating MHE/CHE in certain patients with cirrhosis (e.g., BCAA/LOLA if sarcopenia/frailty, zinc if low serum levels, and l-carnitine if concomitant skeletal
muscle cramps)
8. Whenever a theragnostic approach with lactulose is attempted, it should be followed by an evaluation of adherence and potential symptom improvement 4–8 wk after prescription, to inform continuation
or not
Inpatient management of OHE
9. In patients with cirrhosis and confusion, clinical scores (WH criteria, GCS) identify patients with high-grade HE requiring appropriate triage/transfer to SDU/MICU to prevent complications such as
aspiration pneumonia
10. A thorough evaluation for bleeding, infection, sedating medications, and toxic and metabolic abnormalities is necessary to identify and treat possible precipitating or contributing factors to mental status
changes in patients with cirrhosis
11. A normal blood ammonia level in patients with altered mental status should prompt consideration of other potential diagnoses in addition to OHE
12. If a patient does not recover their mental status after 48–72 hours of adequate HE therapy and precipitating factor reversal, evaluation for alternative causes of altered mental status, inadequately
addressed or unrecognized precipitating factors, or shunts should be considered
Prevention of HE recurrence
13. Engaging in a multidisciplinary medication reconciliation process at hospital discharge is necessary to ensure patients are prescribed appropriate prophylactic therapies against recurrent HE and that
potentially harmful medications are dose reduced or stopped
14. Serum ammonia levels should not be used to guide initiation or titration of HE therapies or in the evaluation of HE recurrence in the outpatient setting
15. A thorough review of medication lists in patients with HE should be performed to identify and minimize therapies that may affect mental status assessment or risk of encephalopathy (e.g., opiates,
benzodiazepines, antiepileptic pain medications [gabapentin and pregabalin], sleep medications [zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone], and proton pump inhibitors)
16. HE therapy may be deescalated and potentially discontinued in a stepwise fashion in patients who clinically recompensate
17. Oral and written advice to avoid driving should be given to patients and caregivers based on expert consensus in patients with recent (,3 mo) episodes of OHE.
18. All patients with HE and their caregivers should receive HE-based educational materials (e.g., www.cirrhosiscare.ca)
19. Caregivers should be screened for caregiver burnout and provided necessary support as appropriate
Sarcopenia and nutrition
20. All patients with HE (including those with MHE/CHE) should be evaluated for impaired muscle health/physical fitness using available tools (e.g., sarcopenia/myosteatosis, skeletal muscle strength,
physical function, frailty, or cardiorespiratory fitness) because these are all important targets of HE therapy
21. Patients with impaired muscle health/physical fitness in any of its clinical presentations (i.e., sarcopenia, physical frailty, and deconditioning), and patients with myosteatosis (fat infiltration into muscle),
have an increased risk for HE
22. Critically ill patients with HE should receive up to 2 g/kg/d protein intake
23. Although sarcopenia is not by itself an indication or a contraindication for TIPS, it could be associated with increased post-TIPS HE and post-TIPS mortality
24. Increases in ammonia levels after anaerobiosis have not been associated with an elevated risk for HE and should not discourage clinicians from prescribing exercise for patients with cirrhosis
25. Patients with any form of HE may experience an increased risk of exercise-induced injury. Supervision by exercise professionals, caregivers, or other surrogates is key to prevent exercise-related adverse
events
Liver transplant and HE
26. Adding 4–5 MELD points regardless of the MELD score iteration used more accurately reflects the 90-day mortality of inpatient OHE and outpatient CHE
27. As multiple HE episodes lead to persistent cognitive impairment which may not recover after LT, early LT could have additional benefits to improve brain function
28. Early evaluation for liver transplantation should be considered in patients with high MELD3.0 scores, severe HE (grades III–IV), or frequent HE episodes, to improve long term outcomes
29. Persistent confusion in an inpatient setting is a relative contraindication to transplant

BCAA, branch-chained amino acid; CHE, covert hepatic encephalopathy; GCS, Glasgow Coma Scale; HE, hepatic encephalopathy; LOLA, l-ornithine-l-aspartate; LT, liver
transplant; MELD, model for end-stage liver disease; MHE, minimal hepatic encephalopathy; OHE, overt hepatic encephalopathy; SDU/MICU, step-down/medical
intensive care unit; TIPS, transjugular portosystemic shunt; WH, West Haven.

© 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology

The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

591

592

Bajaj et al

without cirrhosis with simple portosystemic shunting and (ii) neuropsychiatric and subclinical symptoms can occur as part of this syndrome.
Management of HE requires careful documentation of not only
the circumstances surrounding the current episode but also previous
episodes (11). Prior guidelines focused on 4 axes: (i) type, (ii) grade or
severity, (iii) time course, and (iv) precipitated or not. However, given
the major impact that social determinants of health have on HE, we
have added a ﬁfth axis. A strong social infrastructure is essential to
prevent readmissions or recurrences; it consists of social and family
support, ﬁnancial support to ensure medication adherence and assistance if lower earning or driving capability, and institutional
support from the hospitals to ensure timely and meaningful followup (Figure 2) (12). Using these axes as a checklist, the clinical and
psychosocial determinants of HE recurrence and social determinants
of health in this context can be identiﬁed and potentially addressed.
The guideline here focuses on clinical aspects of HE in patients
with cirrhosis only and provides a framework for ensuring optimal
management and improving clinical and psychosocial outcomes
during the complex patient journey as illustrated in Figure 3. The
focus is on (i) burden of HE from multistakeholder perspective and
prognostic factors; (ii) growing importance of comorbid conditions;
(iii) diagnosis and management of covert HE (CHE)/minimal HE
(MHE); (iv) inpatient management including decision to hospitalize,
refractory HE assessment, and transplant assessment; (v) prevention
of recurrence using medication and nonmedication strategies; (vi)
role of nutrition, sarcopenia in HE management; (vii) emerging
management strategies; and (viii) special circumstances.

BURDEN OF HE
Incidence and prevalence of HE

HE is now the ﬁrst decompensating event among patients with cirrhosis (13). Estimates of the incidence of a ﬁrst episode of HE, however,
are dependent on the population studied and are highly inﬂuenced by

the case-mix of etiologies and disease severity of the cohort at baseline
(14): 1-year incidence of 10% for Child A and 25% for Child B patients
with cirrhosis and portal hypertension (15), 5-year incidence of 3.8%
(less advanced cirrhosis, less reliable diagnostic coding) (16) to 43.7% in
a Veterans Aﬀairs cohort of patients with cirrhosis and portal hypertension and/or an aspartate aminotransferase to Platelet Ratio Index
(APRI) .2.0 (17). Owing to the fractured nature of electronic health
records, an accurate estimate of the prevalence of HE is challenging.
Using the global burden of disease study, it is estimated that the
prevalence of decompensated cirrhosis is 113.2/100,000 adults in the
United States (18). If there are 260 million US adults and roughly 40%
of patients with decompensated cirrhosis will develop HE (16), then
prevalence of HE is roughly 118,000 individuals.
Cost of HE

Per person-year cost data regarding combined inpatient and outpatient expenditures for HE are lacking but the inpatient HE hospitalization costs have risen from $38,897 in 2007 to $49,391 in 2017
(19). HE is the most common cause of readmission among patients
hospitalized for complications of cirrhosis with 90-day readmission
rates of 21%–53% (20,21). With the inclusion of medication and
outpatient care expenditures to those of readmissions, healthcare cost
after an initial hospitalization for HE is substantial at around
$18,457–$20,030 per person per month during a mean follow-up
period of 5.7–6.9 months (22). HE is uniquely associated with collateral damage to the wellbeing of caregivers (23) who report a significant burden, particularly regarding the impact on their schedule,
personal health, and sense of entrapment (24). Adding to the social
challenges faced by patients with HE, caregivers report debt, food
insecurity, diﬃculty paying bills, and evictions while also being unable
to attend to their own health needs (24). Their health-related qualityof-life measures are also impaired (25,26) and reveal severe limitations,
frustration, sadness, and even resentment (25–27).

Figure 1. The 3 villages of HE (First published in Am J Gastroenterol. 2021;116(6):1184–1186. doi:10.14309/ajg.0000000000001212). Villages center
around pathogenesis (village 1), impact of HE (village 2), and village needed to manage HE (village 3). HE, hepatic encephalopathy.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

VOLUME 121 | MARCH 2026 www.amjgastro.com

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

ACG Hepatic Encephalopathy Guideline

CHE AND MHE
Recommendations
1. In patients being evaluated for MHE or CHE, we suggest a singletest strategy over a 2-test combination strategy (conditional
recommendation, very low certainty of evidence).
2. In patients being evaluated for MHE or CHE, we suggest against
using serum ammonia levels alone to make the diagnosis
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence).
3. In patients with MHE/CHE, we suggest treatment with lactulose vs
no treatment (conditional recommendation, low certainty of
evidence).
4. There is insufficient evidence to recommend for or against routine
treatment of MHE/CHE for prevention of overt HE (OHE)
(insufficient evidence, no recommendation).

Key concepts
1. Given the low reproducibility of clinical diagnosis of CHE (minimal
or grade 1 HE), CHE should be defined by excluding OHE (grade
2 or higher) in the appropriate clinical context.
2. Isolated asterixis without alterations in behavior or alertness is not
enough to diagnose OHE.
3. Patients with cirrhosis and 1 or more of the following features
could be prioritized for MHE testing:
a. Hypoalbuminemia
b. Decompensated cirrhosis (e.g., presence of ascites, variceal
bleeding, or jaundice)
c. Clinically significant portal hypertension or presence of
portosystemic shunts
d. Cirrhosis with nonspecific cognitive complaints, difficulties
with concentration, impaired quality of life, navigation issues/
traffic violations, and falls
e. Difficulty operating heavy machinery
f. Commercial drivers/pilots
4. Cognitive testing for CHE/MHE and subsequent therapy with
lactulose or rifaximin may improve health-related quality of life.
5. Since a large proportion of patients with cirrhosis and cognitive
complaints could have conditions other than MHE, specific
assessments for alternative diagnoses such as sleep apnea,
alcohol-related conditions, and mild cognitive impairment should
be performed, ideally in a specialized clinic or through referral,
especially in those with isolated delayed memory issues or
isolated sleep issues.
6. In patients with cirrhosis being evaluated for MHE or CHE, several
testing options are available according to availability of local expertise
and norms: psychometric HE score, Stroop EncephalApp,
QuickStroop, animal naming test, inhibitory control test, continuous
reaction time, and critical flicker frequency.
7. A second-line agent could be considered for treating MHE/CHE in
certain patients (e.g., branch-chained amino acid [BCAA]/
l-ornithine-l-aspartate [LOLA] if sarcopenia/frailty; zinc if low serum
levels, and l-carnitine if concomitant skeletal muscle cramps).
8. Whenever a theragnostic approach (positive therapeutic challenge)
with lactulose is attempted, it should be followed by an evaluation of
adherence and potential symptom improvement 4–8 weeks after
prescription, to inform continuation or not.

Clinical and psychosocial relevance of CHE/MHE

MHE is the subclinical form of HE that can only be identiﬁed
through specialized neuropsychological or neurophysiological
© 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology

testing (28). This is often combined with grade 1 HE by the West
Haven criteria, which is also diﬃcult to diagnose in clinical
practice (28), under the term of CHE. This is to diﬀerentiate it
from the clinically obvious overt HE (OHE) forms
(i.e., grades 2–4) (29). Since patients with grade 1 HE show
abnormal neuropsychological or neurophysiological
testing—similar to patients with MHE—and telling these 2
apart is clinically challenging, MHE and CHE are usually
used interchangeably.
Subtle cognitive or behavioral changes are reported by patients
or their caregivers and/or identiﬁed by an experienced clinician.
Flapping tremor or asterixis can occur in patients with CHE.
Furthermore, bradykinesia, rigidity, and other parkinsonian-like
extrapyramidal signs can also be observed in CHE when carefully
investigated (30–32). By itself, the presence of motor abnormalities on physical examination without a cognitive or
arousal deﬁcit should not automatically classify patients as
having OHE. As such, asterixis alone is not enough to diagnose
OHE, and rather, its presence should direct physicians to
pursue a detailed cognitive history. Recent regulatory updates
in HE drug development have determined that asterixis
without behavioral abnormalities should not be considered or
treated as OHE.
Despite the diﬃcult diagnosis, CHE carries clinical relevance
(28). One of the earliest manifestations of CHE is an attention
deﬁcit—aﬀecting both attention span and attention shift—which
generates dire consequences such as a failing working memory
deﬁcit and impaired learning (33,34). These can result in diminished work productivity or ﬁnancial mishaps. Reduced motor
coordination and psychomotor speed, along with fatigue make
patients with CHE prone to falls and self-injury (35–37). Furthermore, deﬁcits in visuospatial orientation, response inhibition,
and speed of information processing aﬀect their navigation skills,
can make them unﬁt to drive, and result in motor vehicle crashes
(38,39). Patients with CHE have a higher risk for incidental OHE
and admission to the hospital, and it has been reported that CHE
is associated with accelerated cirrhosis progression and death
(40–42). Finally, CHE is associated with decreased quality of life,
as shown in multiple studies through various patient-reported
outcomes tools.
Overall strategy to triage CHE testing

When tested, CHE is found in 20%–80% of patients with cirrhosis
and no prior history of OHE, its prevalence depending on the
degree of hepatic impairment (i.e., highest frequency in ChildTurcotte-Pugh C) (43–45). Despite its high prevalence and providers’ recognition of its importance, less than 15% of centers
routinely test for CHE and at least one-third of practices never
test for CHE (46,47). The low enthusiasm for testing for CHE
likely relates to (i) the lack of a target population gaining a clear
beneﬁt from standardized screening; (ii) the lack of a clear
screening pathway using suﬃciently accurate and userfriendly tests that is easy to implement; and (iii) the lack of
consistent proof of improved outcomes after treatment and
resolution of CHE, although there is improvement in quality
of life.
Studies have shown that patients with hypoalbuminemia or
hyperammonemia are more likely to test positive for CHE
(42,48). Moreover, those with decompensated liver disease
(i.e., ascites variceal bleeding, or jaundice) are at risk of further
decompensation in the form of OHE and would beneﬁt from
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

593

594

Bajaj et al

Figure 2. Five axes to assess and reduce HE recurrence (modified from AASLD/EASL HE Guidelines 2014 Hepatology). Type, grade, time course,
precipitating factor, and social infrastructure are all important in appropriate clinical management and prevention of recurrence of HE. AASLD, American
Association for the Study of Liver Diseases; EASL, European Association for the Study of the Liver; HE, hepatic encephalopathy.

reﬁned risk estimation (49), similar to patients showing portosystemic shunts (particularly if large, $8 mm) on imaging (50). As
such, it is reasonable to test for patients with the aforementioned
conditions, as well as those complaining of mild and unspeciﬁc
cognitive deﬁcits not compatible with OHE—by patient or
caregiver—or experiencing work diﬃculties, traﬃc violations,
motor vehicle accidents, or unprovoked falls (28). Clinical
investigations for unexplained fatigue or deteriorating quality of
life should also include testing for CHE (51). Finally, although
patients with CHE are more prone to exhibit poor sleep quality,
the changes are subtle (52,53) and a standard diﬀerential diagnosis for sleep disorders should be followed. This includes
ruling out obstructive sleep apnea, which is more frequent in
patients with ascites (54,55).
Individual tests for CHE/MHE

Although many tests have been developed to investigate CHE, not
all of them count with both cross-sectional validation, where the
populations of interest are contrasted to existing norms, and

longitudinal validation, where the patients with and without CHE are
followed up over time to determine the associated risk(s) for incidental clinical outcomes (56). A pertinent note on cross-sectional
validation is that it bases the diagnosis of CHE on patients showing
a test result—or battery of tests—that is more extreme (i.e., worse)
than a control population adjusted by age, sex, level of education,
and/or other features known to aﬀect cognition. Since cognitive skills
are also highly dependent on upbringing and cultural environment,
it is recommended to use nationally and culturally validated tests
(57–61). In this regard, complex batteries testing alphabetical
or mathematical skills can show wider variability across
countries and cultural identities. Neurophysiological tests
potentially oﬀer more intercultural stability by testing neurocognitive pathways linked to CHE pathophysiology. Although few laboratory tests have been investigated for the
detection of CHE—including blood ammonia levels—none
has been suﬃciently validated or accurate enough to reach the
clinical arena (62–69), and at the present time, there is no
laboratory test suﬃcient to diagnose or rule out this condition.

Figure 3. A typical patient journey through HE depicted by the orange line. Covert HE can be diagnosed definitively using cognitive testing, while overt HE
(starting from grade 2 or higher West-Haven criteria) often requires hospitalization. A typical patient course includes multiple HE recurrences. HE, hepatic
encephalopathy.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

VOLUME 121 | MARCH 2026 www.amjgastro.com

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

ACG Hepatic Encephalopathy Guideline

Table 4 summarizes some tests that could be performed in
clinics, while Supplementary Table S1 (Supplementary Digital
Content 1, http://links.lww.com/AJG/D846) shows all tests that
have a published record. Tests should be performed in a quiet, welllit room with no distractions or interruptions. Importantly,
agreement between CHE diagnostic tests is poor given that they all
assess diﬀerent aspects of cognitive functioning, with little to no
overlap. Thus, to strengthen CHE diagnosis, professional societies
have recommended using a 2-test strategy with expected agreement between the 2 tests to call CHE out (11). Although attractive,
when tested in the real-world, the 2-test strategy resulted in no
improved accuracy for incidental OHE prediction, when compared
with single testing. Furthermore, the former resulted in a lower
sensitivity making it less appealing—and practical—for screening
(85). Given the intricacies of CHE testing, including the need for
a dedicated history and physical to explore cognitive and sleep
disorders alike, a dedicated clinic with a streamlined workﬂow
would constitute an ideal setup for patients in need of multidisciplinary expertise (86,87).
The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) or the Montreal
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) test has been used particularly in
the research setting to screen for dementia, where patients with
a positive result are referred for in-depth neuropsychological
evaluation. However, MMSE and MoCA can be abnormal in CHE
(61,88,89), and no speciﬁc threshold can help diﬀerentiate the
CHE spectrum from other forms of cognitive deterioration
(i.e., delirium or dementia). Usually, although some MMSE or
MoCA patterns could sway the diagnosis toward dementia, these
escape standard hepatology practice and would require specialized interpretation, without oﬀering complementary screening
information to CHE-dedicated testing in clinical practice.
Whenever mild cognitive deterioration, dementia, or delirium are
being suspected, a referral to specialists in the ﬁeld should be
sought. Usually, patients with isolated delayed memory issues or
isolated sleep issues have overlapping or other explanations for
these issues other than HE (86,87,90).

Treatment for CHE/MHE

Lactulose has been studied to treat CHE in multiple RCTs. Almost universally, improvement in neuropsychological tests has
been reported (91), including a higher MHE reversal rate, when
compared with control group/placebo (92). Quality of life also
improves after treatment (93), and participants under the active
arm experienced a decreased rate of incidental OHE (94,95), although evidence on improved mortality is lacking. Comparisons
of rifaximin to placebo have yielded similar results to those of
lactulose, and rifaximin remained within the noninferiority
margin in an RCT against lactulose (96–98). Rifaximin has also
been reported to help with driving simulation performance (99).
Despite its potential beneﬁt, the cost of rifaximin and diﬃculties
with third-payer approval may make it diﬃcult to justify its use
for CHE treatment.
A theragnostic approach has resurfaced as part of a novel
emphasis on symptom-based management, where a positive
therapeutic challenge can be taken as proof for concept for underlying CHE. As an example, a patient with diﬃculties with
concentration or navigating skill experiencing symptomatic improvement after a short trial of lactulose would provide both
diagnostic and therapeutic justiﬁcation for continued treatment.
Importantly, whenever a clinician decides to follow the theragnostic route, it should contemplate a limited trial duration (e.g.,
4–8 weeks) and a clear symptom-based response, a priori. It
would be unjustiﬁed to keep patients exposed to the adverse
eﬀects of a medication for a long period or for unclear clinical
reasons.
Apart from ﬁrst-line OHE medications, other agents have
been tested as treatment for CHE either with less consistent
positive results or in trials which designs were aﬀected by confounding. These include LOLA, BCAAs, prebiotics/probiotics,
l-carnitine, zinc, and others (100–110). Although blood ammonia
level, inﬂammatory parameters, and magnetic resonance spectroscopy improve after treatment of CHE, results are less consistent (98,109,111–114). Remarkably, there is no ﬁrm evidence

Table 4. Cognitive tests for practical use in clinic

Resources and time
complete

Test description

Tested domains

Reported MHE
or CHE
prevalence

Clinical utility

Pros and cons

App-based version
Stroop
EncephalApp (Full)
of Stroop test
(61,70–72)

Smartphone or tablet
5–15 min

Psychomotor speed,
cognitive flexibility

45%–55%

Predicts OHE

Easy to apply, although full
version can be long for
some patients

Quickstroop
(73,74)

Shorter version of
EncephalApp

Smartphone or tablet
1–2 min

Psychomotor speed

45%–55%

Predicts HE

Not for color blind subjects

Animal Naming
Test (75–78)

Recall of animal
names

Non
1 min

Memory, verbal
retrieval, recall selfmonitoring

30%–40%

Predicts OHE
and death

Practical and easy to apply,
appropriate for
transcultural testing;
however, it is not specific
for MHE/CHE

Critical flicker
frequency (79–84)

Response to
a fused/single
light becoming
a flickering light

Computer and specialized
viewing chamber vs
smartphone and light
source

Integrity of visual tract
and reaction time

40%–55%

Predicts OHE
and death

Appropriate for
transcultural testing, but
needs specialized
equipment; affected if
visual acuity is impaired

CHE, covert hepatic encephalopathy; MHE, minimal hepatic encephalopathy; OHE, overt hepatic encephalopathy.

© 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology

The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

595

596

Bajaj et al

Figure 4. Potential causes of cognitive impairment in patients with cirrhosis that can mimic or worse HE symptoms. HE, hepatic encephalopathy.

to substantiate that treating CHE with a second-line agent
decreases the rate of incidental OHE (115), and no eﬀect on
mortality has been found. Finally, treating CHE with either a ﬁrstline or second-line agent can result in nonserious adverse eﬀects
and ﬁnancial stress that need to be weighed in when contemplating treatment (116). The main beneﬁcial outcome of CHE
therapy is improvement in daily function and quality of life
(95,99,117). The decision to treat and choice of medication
should be discussed with patient/caregiver through a shareddecision-making process, considering the impact of their symptoms and potential challenges related to treatment.

COMORBID CONDITIONS AND CHE/MHE
In the outpatient setting, symptoms such as sleep-wake alterations, changes in behavior or mood, forgetfulness, slow mentation, and speech are very common in patients with cirrhosis (118).
The assumption that these patients have HE ignores other potential contributors to cognitive impairment such as dementia
(87); sleep apnea (54); psychiatric and substance use disorders
(119); and endocrine, metabolic, or medication-related conditions (Figure 4) (118). Older patients with cirrhosis may have
several comorbidities that could mimic HE symptoms (120–122).
An accurate diagnosis of cognitive impairment to diﬀerentiate
HE from other conditions entails a detailed neuropsychological
assessment, which is time-consuming, requires expertise and
speciﬁc equipment. Nevertheless, lack of consideration of other
causes of cognitive problems and the tendency to treat these
symptoms with HE therapies results in patients’ exposure to
unwarranted medications (lactulose, rifaximin) with signiﬁcant
side eﬀects and cost, as well as delays in the diagnosis and treatment of the actual problems. An analysis of 286 patients with
cirrhosis and cognitive complaints referred through a dedicated
consult pathway using detailed history, medication review,
standardized tests (MMSE, Psychometric HE Score, and others),
and obstructive sleep apnea screening found that more than 50%
of patients did not have MHE (86). The diﬀerential diagnosis for
non-HE cognitive symptoms included mild cognitive impairment and dementia, mood disorders, posttraumatic stress disorder, and obstructive sleep apnea. Table 5 includes testing
modalities to help diagnose some of these conditions. An overall
ﬂowchart is in Figure 5.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

The management of comorbidities in the holistic approach to
HE can be crystalized as a 3-pronged approach: addressing factors
that worsen liver function, supporting bodily functions that aid in
ammonia clearance, and improving conditions that could worsen
HE. First, patients with alcohol use disorder should be referred for
therapy and intervention, and sobriety can halt the progression if
not reverse the course of cirrhosis. A similar eﬀect is true for
eradication of hepatitis C and likely so for hepatitis B (131).
Second, as reviewed elsewhere, ameliorating malnutrition including micronutrients such as zinc and macronutrients such as
protein and calories is critical for the support of extrahepatic
metabolism of ammonia. Third, it is possible, although robust
studies are needed, that improvements in glycemic control could
improve response to HE therapies (132).

OHE MANAGEMENT
Decision for outpatient vs inpatient management

Deciding if a patient requires outpatient vs inpatient evaluation is
based on several factors and must be individualized. Some factors
that need to be considered include HE severity (grade), certainty
of HE diagnosis, need for further evaluation/treatment of possible
precipitants, and ability of family and patient to manage in an
outpatient setting (Figure 6). The guiding principles are as
follows:
1. The severity of mental status changes dictates the need for
emergency room evaluation and hospitalization; CHE and
selected patients with grade 2 HE could be managed as outpatient.
2. For patients presenting with their ﬁrst episode of mental status
changes, evaluation in the emergency department may be
necessary to exclude other etiology rather than assuming HE.
A typical presentation consistent with prior HE episodes could
be managed as outpatient if HE grade 2 or less.
3. If there is suspicion of infection, bleeding, dehydration, or
other precipitant requiring further evaluation and treatment,
patients may need emergency room evaluation and possible
hospitalization.
4. If the patient is agitated or unlikely to comply or there is no
reliable support/supervision, outpatient management is not an
option.
VOLUME 121 | MARCH 2026 www.amjgastro.com

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

ACG Hepatic Encephalopathy Guideline

Table 5. Comorbid conditions that may cause or exacerbate cognitive impairment in patients with cirrhosis in outpatient and inpatient
settings
Outpatients and cognitive impairment
Comorbid condition(s)

Diagnostic approach

Mild cognitive impairment, dementia

MMSE or Montreal cognitive assessment (88,89,123)

Endocrine or electrolyte disorders (DM, hypothyroidism,
hyponatremia/hypernatremia, hypocalcemia/hypercalcemia)

Hemoglobin A1c
Thyroid panel
Chemistry panel

Sleep disorders

STOP-BANG questionnaires for Obstructive Sleep Apnea
(124); assess adherence if already on CPAP; PROMIS8 sleep
(125)

Mood disorders

PHQ-9 for depression (126), Beck Anxiety Inventory (127)

Posttraumatic test disorder

PCL-5: PTSD Checklist for DSM-5 (128)

Substance abuse

Toxicology screen, DAST (129), AUDIT-C (130)

Medication effect

Medication review, especially for pain (opioids, gabapentin),
anxiety (benzodiazepines), and insomnia

Neurologic conditions (stroke, brain lesions or bleeding,
neurological infections, epilepsy)

Brain CT or MRI
Electroencephalogram
Lumbar puncture

Inpatient diagnosis and alternatives
Exclude other causes of acute mental status
Sepsis
Diabetes complications causing encephalopathy (hypoglycemic, hyperosmolar, and ketoacidosis)
Uremic encephalopathy
Severe electrolyte disorders (hyponatremia/hypernatremia, hypocalcemia/hypercalcemia)
Other hyperosmolar conditions: diabetes insipidus, and intoxication (ethylene glycol, methanol)
Intoxication or withdrawal (alcohol, benzodiazepines, opiates, and other drugs)
Wernicke’s encephalopathy
Hypoxic or hypercapnic encephalopathy
Neurological conditions (intracranial bleed, stroke, trauma, malignancy, and neuroinfection)
Epilepsy (nonconvulsive epilepsy, postictal state)
Endocrine (hypothyroidism/hyperthyroidism, adrenal insufficiency, and panhypopituitarism)
Exposures (carbon monoxide, heavy metals)
Acute psychosis
Dementia
Identify and treat precipitating factors for hepatic encephalopathy
Infection
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Electrolyte disorder
Acute kidney injury
Constipation
Dehydration
AUDIT-C, Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test; CPAP, continuous positive airway pressure; CT, computed tomography; DAST, Drug Abuse Screen Test; DM, diabetes
mellitus; MMSE, Mini-Mental Status Examination; PHQ, patient health questionnaire; PROMIS, Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System; PTSD,
posttraumatic test disorder.

If there are no precipitating factors other than the need to
adjust lactulose regimen, many patients with CHE or selected
grade 2 HE could be managed with careful medication review and

© 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology

close outpatient follow-up. Adjusting HE treatment early prevents progression and avoids complications such as aspiration
pneumonia which could signiﬁcantly alter the patients’ outcome.

The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

597

598

Bajaj et al

Inpatient management of HE

Recommendations
5. In patients with HE, we suggest against routine testing of serum
ammonia to guide HE treatment decisions (conditional
recommendation, very low certainty of evidence).
6. In patients with cirrhosis and confusion without new-onset focal
neurologic deficits, we suggest against routine brain imaging
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence).
7. In patients with OHE, we recommend treatment with lactulose to
improve patient outcomes and prevent recurrence of OHE
episodes (strong recommendation, moderate certainty of
evidence).
8. In patients with OHE, we suggest treatment with high-volume
(e.g., 4 L) polyethylene glycol preparations as an alternative option
to lactulose therapy (conditional recommendation, low certainty
of evidence).
9. In patients with acute OHE, we suggest adding rifaximin to
lactulose therapy vs lactulose therapy alone (conditional
recommendation, low certainty of evidence).

Key concepts
10. In patients with cirrhosis and confusion, clinical scores (West
Haven criteria, Glasgow Coma Scale) identify patients with highgrade HE requiring appropriate triage/transfer to step-down/
medical intensive care unit to prevent complications such as
aspiration pneumonia.
11. A thorough evaluation for bleeding, infection, sedating
medications, and toxic and metabolic abnormalities is
necessary to identify and treat possible precipitating or
contributing factors to mental status changes in patients with
cirrhosis.
12. A normal blood ammonia level in patients with altered mental
status should prompt consideration of other potential diagnoses
in addition to OHE.
13. If a patient does not recover their mental status after 48–72
hours of adequate HE therapy and precipitating factor reversal,
evaluation for alternative causes of altered mental status,
inadequately addressed or unrecognized precipitating factors,
or shunts should be considered.
14. Engaging in a multidisciplinary medication reconciliation
process at hospital discharge is necessary to ensure that
patients are prescribed appropriate prophylactic therapies
against recurrent HE and that potentially harmful medications
are dose reduced or stopped.

HE should be suspected in any patient with cirrhosis and
altered mental status (Figures 7 and 8). The initial evaluation
should focus on:
1. grading the severity of mental status changes, to appropriately
triage the level of care (outpatient vs regular ﬂoor vs stepdown/intensive care) and interventions;
2. determining if HE is indeed the cause of mental status changes
(with or without other conditions that can cause cognitive
changes);
3. identiﬁcation of precipitating or contributing factors which
will require treatment in addition to the speciﬁc therapy
for HE; common precipitating factors are constipation,
gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding, infections, hyponatremia, and
dehydration/diuretic overdose.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

HE diagnosis is based on clinical symptoms and examination
ﬁndings. There is no test to speciﬁcally conﬁrm HE, and HE is
ultimately a diagnosis of exclusion. HE is assumed to be the most
likely explanation of mental status changes when careful evaluation for other conditions is negative. HE is suspected in patients
with cirrhosis who present with deﬁcits in attention and concentration, from shortened attention span to disorientation,
confusion, and somnolence, and it can further progress to lethargy and coma. Patients can also have sleep disturbances, personality changes, bizarre behavior, and sometimes psychiatric
and neurological symptoms (133).
A thorough clinical examination, including a full neurological
assessment, will help determine the following:
1. The severity of cognitive deﬁcits will appropriately triage the
initial interventions (such as intubation to secure airways) and
disposition (need for step-down or intensive care unit). West
Haven criteria (134) (Figures 7 and 8) should be used to
determine the grade of HE on initial presentation and
throughout hospital course. The Glasgow Coma Scale (135)
(Figures 7 and 8) should be used to assess and monitor patients
with signiﬁcant impairment of their level of consciousness.
Other scales are used for inpatient trials to standardize OHE
severity. The Hepatic Encephalopathy Scoring Algorithm is
a tool validated across all grades of HE and uses the clinical and
paper-pencil test to incorporate attention, memory, and
psychomotor function (Figure 7) (136). It uses a point based
system for both clinical and neuropsychological assessment to
determine the grade of HE; however, it takes about 20 minutes to
administer, and it is used in the research setting rather than in
clinical practice. Other scales such as Hepatic Encephalopathy
Grading Instrument and Hepatic Encephalopathy Staging Tool
have also been studied in trials to increase the speciﬁcity of the
semiquantitative West-Haven criteria (137,138).
2. Asterixis (ﬂapping tremor of the hand when wrists are
hyperextended) can be elicited in patients with lower grade
HE, but it can be observed in metabolic encephalopathy of
other etiology (uremia).
3. Presence of new focal neurological ﬁndings would make HE
less likely or will point to a neurological condition that requires
further evaluation with brain imaging and neurology consult.
4. Presence of precipitating/contributing factors, such as
infection (including skin or oral cavity) or bleeding, will
require further evaluation and treatment.
Laboratory evaluation will help determine precipitating/
contributing factors, such as bleeding, infection, and toxic and
electrolyte/metabolic abnormalities (Table 5). Infections are the
most common cause of hospital admission in cirrhosis and
a common precipitating factor for HE; therefore, culture of blood,
ascites, and urine should be performed in all patients, as well as
stool and sputum if clinical suspicion (139). Venous ammonia
should not be routinely measured because it is not a diagnostic
test for HE (140). It can be used to rule out HE because diagnosis is
questionable if a patient is stuporous or comatose and ammonia
level is normal. HE therapy should not be adjusted based on the
ammonia level (141), but rather on clinical improvement. Despite
its central role in the pathophysiology of HE, ammonia testing in
clinical laboratories is unreliable and should not inform diagnosis
or treatment decisions in the inpatient or outpatient management
of HE (142). For example, in a study of 551 patients diagnosed
VOLUME 121 | MARCH 2026 www.amjgastro.com

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

ACG Hepatic Encephalopathy Guideline

Figure 5. Proposed flow chart to evaluate patients with cirrhosis and cognitive complaints. This specifically addresses the 3 most common comorbid
conditions (alcohol use disorder, obstructive sleep apnea, and dementia/mild cognitive impairment). AUDIT-C, Alcohol Use Disorders Identification TestConcise; CHE, covert hepatic encephalopathy; MCI, mild cognitive impairment; MMSE, Mini-Mental Status Examination; MoCA, Montreal Cognitive
Assessment.

with HE, 40% had normal serum ammonia levels, and lactulose
therapy did not diﬀer between those with normal and elevated
ammonia (143). Sample handing and processing as well as protein intake all interfere with or aﬀect blood ammonia values (144).
Furthermore, venous ammonia levels do not correlate with severity of HE (142), and prognosis of patients with cirrhosis admitted with confusion was similar regardless of ammonia level
increase (145). Clinical assessment should therefore be relied on
for the diagnosis of HE, grading of severity, and response to
treatment including remission and recurrence.
For patients with cirrhosis and acute mental status changes requiring hospitalization, especially with seizures and new focal deﬁcits,
the diﬀerential diagnosis should include neurological conditions
(intracranial bleed, stroke, brain lesion, nonconvulsive epilepsy, neurological infections, and dementia) or other metabolic encephalopathy

(sepsis, uremia, and hypoxia), especially if clinical ﬁndings suggestive of
these etiologies, or lack of response to primary HE treatment.
Brain imaging performed clinically (routine computed tomography scan or MRI) does not diagnose HE, and it has limited
value in patients without focal neurological deﬁcits, seizures, or
those with multiple prior episodes (146–148). It is useful to investigate other conditions such as acute and chronic subdural
hematoma, subarachnoid bleeding, stroke, or brain lesion in
patients with situations mentioned earlier (149). This is separate
from research-related brain multimodal imaging, which has a role
in determining the pathophysiology of HE.
Medications for inpatient HE

First-line treatment includes nonabsorbable disaccharides
(lactulose), treatment of precipitating/contributing factors, and

Figure 6. Decision-making aid in whether to hospitalize a patient with suspected HE that focuses on severity, presentation, precipitants, and social
infrastructure. HE, hepatic encephalopathy.
© 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology

The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

599

600

Bajaj et al

Figure 7. Outline of the major scales that have been used to grade inpatients with HE. HE, hepatic encephalopathy.

optimization of nutritional status (Figure 8). Nonabsorbable
disaccharides such as lactulose have been used for the management of HE for decades (150). The mechanism of action of lactulose is controversial and is based on its ability to acidify the gut
lumen (preventing the absorption of ammonia by trapping it as
ammonium ions in the gut, and increasing its elimination with
the stool through its laxative eﬀect), presumed prebiotic eﬀect
(inhibiting ammoniagenic bacteria and promoting acidophilic

bacteria lacking urease such as lactobacilli, which produce less
ammonia), and inhibition of intestinal glutamine uptake and
subsequent decreased ammoniagenesis (151). Lactulose for the
treatment of acute HE can be administered orally for patients with
grade 2 HE (152,153), using a dose of 10–20 g (15–30 mL) every
2 hours until the patient has 2 soft bowel movements, with subsequent dose reduction to 2–4 times per day, to maintain 2–3
bowel movements daily (154). Patients with grade 3–4 HE who

Figure 8. Flowchart for inpatient management and discharge transitions for patients with HE. AKI, acute kidney injury; BM, bowel movements; HE, hepatic
encephalopathy; IR, interventional radiology; NGT, nasogastric tube; PO, per oral; PT, physical therapy; SBO, small bowel obstruction; SDU/MICU, stepdown/medical intensive care unit.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

VOLUME 121 | MARCH 2026 www.amjgastro.com

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

ACG Hepatic Encephalopathy Guideline

Figure 9. Proposed flowchart for patients with HE who do not respond to initial therapy. HE, hepatic encephalopathy.

are unable to swallow or patients who are at risk of aspiration will
require placement of nasogastric tube, using similar dosing to oral
administration, or lactulose enema in patients with preserved anal
sphincter tone (200 g lactulose or 300 mL of lactulose solution with
700 mL of water or normal saline, retain for 30–60 minutes, repeat
every 4–6 hours until improvement in mental status) (155). Careful
titration of lactulose is critical because overuse can lead to complications such as perianal skin irritation/infection, ileus, aspiration, dehydration, hypernatremia, and hypokalemia, which can
become potential precipitants of HE recurrence (156).
Other laxative agents such as magnesium salts were used before the introduction of lactulose, suggesting that catharsis alone
may be eﬀective for treatment of HE. In a RCT, polyethylene
glycol 3350-electrolyte solution (PEG3350) led to more rapid HE
resolution than standard lactulose therapy (157). PEG3350, oral
or through nasogastric tube, should be considered in patients who
have abdominal discomfort or gas distension or ileus from lactulose (158).
Tap water enema has the beneﬁt of rapid access and wide
availability, but acidifying agents such as lactose and lactitol were
found to be superior to tap water enemas for acute management
of HE (159,160).
Rifaximin (a nonabsorbable antibiotic that aﬀects ammonia
production by modulating intestinal bacterial composition) is an
established treatment for HE recurrence (161,162), but the impact of rifaximin use for acute treatment of HE is less deﬁned
(163). There are data suggesting that rifaximin in combination
with lactulose might be more eﬀective than lactulose alone for the
inpatient treatment of HE (164). A RCT showed that the combination of rifaximin and lactulose resulted in a higher rate of
complete reversal of HE, a reduction in hospital stay and mortality (165).
© 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology

Albumin was investigated as an adjunct to lactulose for
treatment of HE, with limited data showing an increased rate of
complete HE reversal and reduction in mortality (166,167), but its
role remains unclear.
Treatment of precipitating factors is important not only because it addresses the underlying cause for admission (infection,
bleeding, and dehydration), but it may also reverse HE. Concomitant disorders with a signiﬁcant eﬀect on mental status in
patients with cirrhosis include hyponatremia, hyperglycemia,
and thiamine deﬁciency. Of note, hyponatremia, hyperglycemia,
and sepsis can independently cause metabolic encephalopathy or
precipitate HE through their impact on HE pathophysiological
mechanisms (168,169). Timely diagnosis of potential precipitants
requires a high index of suspicion especially if patients’ mental
status interferes with a complete history. As such, a thorough
investigation for infection including diagnostic paracentesis is of
utmost importance for early diagnosis and treatment (139,140).
Empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics should not be used in the
absence of symptoms or laboratory ﬁndings suggestive of active
infection and if started should be tailored quickly based on culture
results or discontinued if no signs of infection are found.
Treatment of HE for patients in intensive care unit (ICU). Various
liver or nonliver injuries (viral hepatitis, drug-induced liver injury,
alcohol-associated hepatitis, pneumonia, or other infections) in
patients with chronic liver disease might result in hepatic and extrahepatic organ failures (termed acute on chronic liver failure or
ACLF) (170). Management of HE for these patients is addressed in
the recent 2022 ACG guidelines (171), including considerations on
evaluation, concomitant medications use for pain, agitation, and/or
sedation, as well as goals of care. For patients who require ICU
management in the absence of ACLF, all those principles apply, but
there are a few additional aspects to consider.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

601

602

Bajaj et al

1. Use of lactulose will require adjustment primarily based on
bowel movements because mental status assessment will not
be possible in a patient intubated and sedated. In patients with
fecal incontinence requiring use of a fecal management system
(rectal tube), lactulose and other laxatives should be held
if .300 mL stool per day. Monitoring for hypernatremia that
suggests dehydration and eﬀorts to prevent aspiration are
critical.
2. Use of rifaximin in ICU is of limited value especially in patients
who are already on broad-spectrum antibiotics. A recent doubleblind trial of patients with OHE admitted to the ICU showed
that reversal of OHE was similar in the group on antibiotics
alone when compared with antibiotics plus rifaximin (172).
3. Use of nontraditional therapies for HE. Ammonia is a small
molecule, water soluble, and not signiﬁcantly protein-bound;
therefore, it is highly dialyzable. Early start of renal replacement
therapy for hyperammonemia (level .100 μmol/L) may have
a beneﬁcial role in patients with acute liver failure (8) or for
patients with urea cycle disorders (173), but there are insuﬃcient
data to support its use for patients with cirrhosis, solely for the
purpose of decreasing serum ammonia. High-volume plasma
exchange may improve HE and have survival beneﬁt in patients
with acute liver failure (174), but this is not demonstrated in
patients with cirrhosis. Albumin dialysis (molecular adsorbent
recirculating system) has been shown to reduce the grade of HE in
cirrhosis and potentially bridge to transplant (175), but further
studies are necessary to deﬁne its impact and role in HE
management.

NONRESPONSE TO HE THERAPY
Improvement in mental status with ﬁrst-line treatment is
expected within 24–48 hours. If there is nonresponse with persistence of delirium after 48 hours despite optimal bowel movements and treatment of precipitating factors, the patients should
be re-evaluated for other causes of altered mentation (Figure 9):
1. Explore an alternate diagnosis: In clinical practice, ammonia
levels are checked haphazardly by varying healthcare
providers, and if the levels are normal, alternative causes of
altered mentation should be investigated. Low or normal
ammonia levels in patients with cirrhosis have a negative
predictive value for HE being the cause of altered mentation.
Recent head trauma, falls, seizures, and/or surgeries should all
be considered in the diﬀerential diagnosis after all of the
potential precipitants have been investigated.
2. Determine undiagnosed precipitants: Healthcare providers
should monitor blood work for electrolyte disorders and renal
failure, take a thorough history regarding central acting
medications or recreational drugs (while verifying with urine
drug screen and phosphatidylethanolamine testing), clinically be
aware of any overt GI bleeding that can be therapeutically
addressed; however, it is important to always search for an
infectious etiology (pan culture, perform paracentesis, and chest
x-ray) if there is nonresponse within 48 hours of lactulose 6
rifaximin treatment for HE, because in this speciﬁc setting,
OHE will not improve unless directed treatment toward speciﬁc
infections are targeted. Furthermore, cross-sectional imaging can
help aid in the diagnosis of prior transjugular portosystemic shunt
(TIPS) placement vs having spontaneous portosystemic shunts
(SPSSs) that could be investigated in the appropriate clinical
setting (see point 3 below) in nonresponse to standard treatments.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

3. Identify impact of other factors such as portosystemic shunts
(TIPS or spontaneous) which may require closure. Persistent
encephalopathy despite appropriate medical treatment should
always be investigated using cross-sectional imaging such as
computed tomography or MRI (also mentioned in preventing
recurrence). The incidence of SPSSs ranges from 46% to 71%
in cases of HE refractory to medical therapy compared with
14% without SPSS (176). Further details are in the section
below focused on SPSS.

PREVENTION OF HE RECURRENCE
Recommendations
10. After an initial episode of OHE, we recommend lactulose titrated
to 2–3 soft bowel movements daily as outpatient first-line therapy
for prevention of HE recurrence (strong recommendations, high
certainty of evidence).
11. In patients treated with lactulose for HE, we suggest using the
Bristol Stool Scale with bowel movement frequency for the
outpatient titration of lactulose to reduce readmissions
(conditional recommendation, very low certainty of evidence).
12. In patients with cirrhosis and OHE, we suggest rifaximin therapy
in the outpatient setting to prevent HE recurrence (conditional
recommendation, low certainty of evidence).
13. In patients with OHE on lactulose maintenance therapy who
experience recurrent episodes of HE, we recommend addition of
rifaximin treatment (strong recommendation, high certainty of
evidence).
14. In patients with OHE and persistent symptoms despite lactulose
and rifaximin therapy, we suggest the addition of zinc
supplementation in those with low blood zinc levels (conditional
recommendation, very low certainty of evidence).
15. We suggest implementing health information technology
interventions, when feasible, to optimize HE management
(conditional recommendations, very low certainty of evidence).
16. We suggest shunt embolization in patients with refractory HE on
optimized medical therapy who have adequate hepatic function
and no contraindications (conditional recommendation, very
low certainty of evidence).

Key concepts
14. Serum ammonia levels should not be used to guide initiation or
titration of HE therapies or in the evaluation of HE recurrence in
the outpatient setting.
15. A thorough review of medication lists in patients with HE should
be performed to identify and minimize therapies that may affect
mental status assessment or risk of encephalopathy (e.g.,
opiates, benzodiazepines, antiepileptic pain medications
[gabapentin and pregabalin], sleep medications [zolpidem,
zaleplon, and eszopiclone], and proton pump inhibitors).
16. HE therapy may be deescalated and potentially discontinued in
a stepwise fashion in patients who clinically recompensate.
17. Oral and written advice to avoid driving should be given to
patients and caregivers based on expert consensus in patients
with recent (,3 months) episodes of OHE.
18. All patients with HE and their caregivers should receive HEbased educational materials (e.g., www.cirrhosiscare.ca).
19. Caregivers should be screened for caregiver burnout and
provided necessary support as appropriate.

VOLUME 121 | MARCH 2026 www.amjgastro.com

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

ACG Hepatic Encephalopathy Guideline

Figure 10. Proposed flowchart to prevent HE-related recurrences. HE, hepatic encephalopathy.

The risk of recurrence of OHE after an index episode is signiﬁcant, with approximately 40%–60% of patients experiencing
a second episode within 1 year (153,177). Secondary prophylaxis
is therefore indicated in all patients with cirrhosis who develop
OHE. These include medication and supportive nonmedication
approaches. It is important to consider the social infrastructure
for HE or the ﬁfth axis in this setting, to ensure adequate
implementation of the medical plans (Figure 10).
Medications

Lactulose has been demonstrated to signiﬁcantly decrease the risk
of recurrence of HE compared with placebo (150,153,177). To
prevent recurrence, lactulose dosing and frequency are typically
titrated to 2–3 soft bowel movements daily to ensure eﬃcacy
while avoiding diarrhea-associated hypovolemia. Adverse events
in this setting are generally mild and include nausea, bloating,
ﬂatulence, and diarrhea. However, breakthrough episodes of HE
in patients being prescribed lactulose are commonly attributed to
nonadherence or dehydration (156). Incorporation of the Bristol
© 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology

Stool Scale (BSS) removes the focus from having the 2–3 daily
bowel movement frequency to the characteristics of these bowel
movements. Use of BSS has been shown to complement goal daily
bowel movements in stabilizing lactulose regimens and improving patient adherence to therapy (154). There are apps that can
assist with monitoring the number of daily bowel movements
(178). Artiﬁcial intelligence-enabled apps using standardized
assessment of stool target based on BSS can provide just-in-time
feedback on lactulose dosing suﬃciency (179,180). Typically,
a score of 5 or more on the BSS would require cutting down on
lactulose or suggest the need to add rifaximin in those already on
lactulose. If BSS is $5 even before lactulose initiation, then these
patients should be considered for alternative, nonlaxative therapies de novo to ensure adherence.
Rifaximin is a nonsystemic antibiotic that has broad activity
against aerobic and anaerobic bacteria and thereby modulates the
bacterial composition of the intestinal microbiota (162). It has
been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the
reduction in risk of OHE recurrence in adults at a dose of 550 mg
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

603

604

Bajaj et al

twice daily. A RCT compared rifaximin with placebo in 299
patients with cirrhosis and $2 episodes of OHE in the preceding
6 months who were in remission at trial entry, 91% of which were
concomitantly taking lactulose. After 6 months of therapy, the
rifaximin-treated patients had a 58% risk reduction (number
needed to treat 4) in experiencing a breakthrough episode of OHE
and a 50% risk reduction (number needed to treat of 9) in experiencing an HE-related hospitalization (161). A subsequent
systematic review and meta-analysis that included 17 RCTs
conﬁrmed that rifaximin therapy was beneﬁcial regarding secondary prevention of HE (181). In a recent post hoc subgroup
analysis of a phase 3 RCT, rifaximin plus lactulose was more
eﬀective than lactulose alone in preventing the recurrence of OHE
and HE-related hospitalization (182). Rifaximin monotherapy has
been shown to eﬀectively maintain remission from HE and has
been associated with a lower risk of hospitalization compared with
lactulose monotherapy in small or retrospective studies
(22,183,184). However, the preponderance of available evidence
supports the superior eﬃcacy of rifaximin in combination with
lactulose in patients who can tolerate dual therapy (163). Rifaximin
is generally safe and well-tolerated compared with placebo in this
population (161,163). A novel preparation of rifaximin soluble
dispersion tablets is currently being investigated given its higher
water solubility and less reliance on the presence of bile acids for
action (137). The results of this RCT are currently pending.
We need better adherence to HE quality care measures such as
appropriate lactulose titration and rifaximin use (185,186). In
2016, Tapper et al (187) published on the use of electronic order
sets for spontaneous bacterial peritonitis management and appropriate lactulose titration and rifaximin use in 824 patients.
Thirty-day readmissions were reduced by 40% as compared with
the preintervention control period. A subsequent study by
Louissaint et al evaluated a more active interruptive best practice
alert-based strategy to advise rifaximin use for patients with HE
on lactulose. Although rifaximin prescription rates remained
high and stable (74%) on GI/hospitalist-based services, on nonGI/nonhospitalist services, the rifaximin prescriptions increased
from 52.6% to 71.1%. The intervention was also associated with
a signiﬁcantly reduced readmission risk (subdistribution hazard
ratio of 0.77, [95% CI 0.67–0.95]) (188).
Given the role of gut microbiota in the pathophysiology of HE,
there is interest in the use of fecal microbiota transplant (FMT)
for HE prevention. Enema-based FMT was evaluated in a 20person phase 1 trial after antibiotics vs standard of care, which
showed safety and a reduction in HE recurrence at 6 and
12 months (189). This was followed by a capsule-based FMT
without pre-FMT antibiotics was evaluated in another 20-person
phase 1 trial (190) and an open-label single-arm trial (191). Both
of these conﬁrmed potential safety and paved the way for larger
trials. The THEMATIC trial, a larger phase 2a dose-ranging
double-blind trial in patients on lactulose and rifaximin that
tested capsule or enema routes, FMT was safe and associated with
reduced HE recurrence compared with placebo (192). The speciﬁc route or dose was not contributory toward protection from
recurrence. In general, results seem to suggest beneﬁts; however,
all FMT for HE should be conﬁned to clinical trials at this time.
Zinc has been studied as a treatment for HE given its role as
a cofactor in nitrogen metabolism. Zinc deﬁciency decreases the
eﬃciency of the urea cycle and has been implicated in the pathogenesis of HE among aﬀected patients with cirrhosis (139,193).
Overall results regarding the eﬃcacy of zinc treatment for HE
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

have been conﬂicting. However, zinc seems to be a safe adjunctive
therapy that may improve cognitive function when added to
lactulose in HE (194,195).
Several medications have been identiﬁed as precipitants of HE
events or as increasing the risk of HE (196). Central nervous
system depressant medications may exacerbate the neurotoxicity
of ammonia (140). Opioids also impair intestinal motility, enabling more ammonia to be absorbed into the bloodstream, and
have been shown to increase the risk of HE in patients with
cirrhosis (197,198). Benzodiazepine use has been associated with
HE-related hospitalization and increased healthcare utilization
among patients with cirrhosis (196,199). Gabapentin and its related
medications that act through the gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA)
neurotransmitter pathway are similarly expected to increase this risk
of HE (196). The sleep aid zolpidem, a nonbenzodiazepine that also
acts through GABAergic neurotransmission, has been associated
with HE as well as falls in patients with HE (200,201). Beyond sedating medications, numerous studies have demonstrated that
proton pump inhibitor use increases the risk of HE (202–205). This
consequence of proton pump inhibitor therapy in cirrhosis is likely
related to alterations in gut microbiota resulting from gastric acid
suppression (206). Deprescribing exacerbating medications should
be approached in a coordinated and multidisciplinary fashion by all
relevant providers in conjunction with an informed discussion with
the patient with HE (207).
Although rare, certain decompensated cirrhosis patients who
fully recompensate with cure or suppression of the underlying
etiology of their cirrhosis may no longer require secondary prophylaxis against HE (208,209). Recompensation outside of HE
involves resolution of ascites oﬀ diuretics and the absence of
variceal bleeding for 12 months in addition to demonstrated
improvement of liver function including serum albumin, international normalized ratio, and total bilirubin (210). If such
a patient has no signs of symptoms of HE while on therapy, HEdirected medications may be discontinued sequentially while
monitoring closely for recurrence.
Adherence to an HE regimen depends in large part on social
determinants of health and patient access to prescribed medications
(211) given that the cost of rifaximin remains signiﬁcant. Providers
should therefore assess aﬀordability of HE therapy on a per patient
basis, particularly as even brief lapses in rifaximin therapy have been
associated with readmissions for HE after an initial HE hospitalization
(22). In addition to adequate medications, other approaches to prevent
HE recurrence need to be instituted. There are multiple forms of
psychosocial interventions, checklists, and App-based interventions
(178,186,188,212,213). These include the Patient Buddy App, which
has been used in clinical trials to increase adherence and reduce HErelated readmissions through increasing communication between the
study team and the patients and their families (178,213).
Caregivers should be engaged and educated. Patient and
caregiver knowledge of HE has been found to be low across
multiple studies (214–219). There is improvement in this
knowledge using educational interventions ranging from booklets to multimedia material (216–218,220,221). Most patients and
caregivers are interested in receiving educational interventions
(222,223). Caregiver burden is considerable, which is identiﬁed
using methods such as Zarit Burden Interview short and long
forms (24,224–231). HE-based educational materials should be
provided to all patients with HE and their caregivers. The patient
codeveloped HE educational material can be found at https://
cirrhosiscare.ca/confusion/ (212,232).
VOLUME 121 | MARCH 2026 www.amjgastro.com

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

ACG Hepatic Encephalopathy Guideline

Screening results from these tools should guide additional
evaluation and support requirements including consultation of
palliative care and/or social work professionals (224). Deterioration of driving skills in patients with HE has a signiﬁcant
impact on both patients and caregivers; driving history should be
obtained at clinic visits, and counseling and possible interventions should be discussed with patient/caregivers. As per
a recent International Society for Hepatic Encephalopathy and
Nitrogen Metabolism consensus, oral and written advice to avoid
driving should be given to patients and caregivers based on expert
consensus only in patients with recent (,3 months) episodes of
OHE (28).
Coping strategies are promising interventions to reduce the
impact of HE on patient-reported and clinical outcomes. A prepost study suggests that mindfulness meditation can improve
sleep and depressive symptoms for patients and caregivers alike
(233). Meditation was also associated with improved quality of
life and cramp severity for patients with HE suﬀering from lower
body cramps (234). However, in a trial of meditative journaling
for caregivers of patients with cirrhosis, there were inconsistent
eﬀects on caregiver burden (235). Thirty patients with CHE were
recruited for a trial of cognitive training using video games to
assess the impact on cognitive function, health-related quality of
life (HRQoL), and MRI features of brain injury. The eﬀects observed showed only partial improvements on functional MRI
without positive eﬀects on HRQoL or cognitive function (236).
Additional trials of mind-body methods remain warranted (237).
SPSS investigation for nonresponse or multiple recurrences

SPSSs occur in up to 60% of people with cirrhosis. They are
a marker of clinically signiﬁcant portal hypertension and predict
clinical decompensation as well as an increased risk of recurrent
HE (50,238,239). The mechanism of action is a “ﬂow steal”
phenomenon where shunting of the blood into the systemic circulation occurs, bypassing the liver, thereby decreasing hepatic
clearance of neurotoxins. This occurs in a stepwise fashion, where
there is an early course (patients are asymptomatic with good
hepatic reserve), and over time, a later course ensues (patients get
OHE), and once it progresses to end stage (hepatic atrophy with
poor hepatic reserve 6 portal vein thrombosis), patients have
recurrent HE readmissions while on optimal medical therapy.
Therefore, in patients with refractory HE, evaluation for SPSS
should be sought and in the right clinical setting (MELD usually ,15), embolization should be considered (especially if shunts
are $ 8 mm diameter) (240).
In patients with recurrent or persistent HE despite adequate
medical treatment, cross-sectional imaging should be performed
to evaluate for SPSS (241). Two retrospective cohort studies
support a reduction in HE with obliteration of accessible portosystemic shunts, the earliest series noting that 59.4% remained
HE free within 100 days after embolization (176,242). In that
series, logistic regression identiﬁed the MELD score as the
strongest predictive factor of HE recurrence, leading to a recommendation for a MELD cutoﬀ of #11 for patient selection (176).
Closure of shunts can be considered at the time of TIPS to reduce
the risk of HE. A reduced risk HE was observed in a meta-analysis
of small cohort studies and 2 small randomized trials of simultaneous shunt closure (243). This eﬀect was also observed in
a large retrospective cohort where 8 mm TIPS was used (244). It is
unclear if these data can be generalized to patients for whom TIPS
is considered for ascites. Postembolization, consideration should
© 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology

be given to re-evaluation of HE symptoms, laboratory test results
and liver doppler ultrasound in 1 month (assess for thrombosis,
development of ascites), repeat upper endoscopy in 6 months’
time (assess for de novo or worsening esophageal varices), and
repeat cross-sectional imaging in 1 year (assess for new SPSS
development) (239). Embolization can also be performed using
endoscopic ultrasound if needed (245). All decisions for embolization should be made in concert with a multidisciplinary team
inclusive of hepatology and radiology because this could increase
the formation of varices and ascites.

FRAILTY, SARCOPENIA, NUTRITION, AND HE
Recommendations
17. We recommend a protein intake target of 1.2–1.5 g/kg/d in
outpatients with HE (strong recommendation, moderate
certainty of evidence).
18. We recommend BCAA supplementation in individuals with HE if
protein needs cannot be met by food alone (strong
recommendation, moderate certainty of evidence).
19. We suggest a late-night snack for patients with cirrhosis to
reduce frailty and HE (conditional recommendation, very low
certainty of evidence).
20. We suggest against protein restriction in patients with HE
because it increases muscle breakdown and does not reduce
the duration of HE (conditional recommendation, very low
certainty of evidence).
21. We suggest exercise interventions in patients with HE to reduce
the risk for falls, lower portal pressure, and increase the capacity
of skeletal muscle for ammonia metabolism (conditional
recommendation, low certainty of evidence).

Key concepts
20. All patients with HE (including those with MHE/CHE) should be
evaluated for impaired muscle health/physical fitness using
available tools (e.g., sarcopenia/myosteatosis, skeletal muscle
strength, physical function, and frailty or cardiorespiratory
fitness) because these are all important targets of HE therapy.
21. Patients with impaired muscle health/physical fitness in any of its
clinical presentations (i.e., sarcopenia, physical frailty, and
deconditioning), and patients with myosteatosis (fat infiltration
into muscle), have an increased risk for HE.
22. Critically ill patients with HE should receive up to 2 g/kg/d protein
intake.
23. Although sarcopenia is not by itself an indication or
a contraindication for TIPS, it could be associated with increased
post-TIPS HE and post-TIPS mortality.
24. Increases in ammonia levels after anaerobiosis have not been
associated with an elevated risk for HE and should not
discourage clinicians from prescribing exercise for patients with
cirrhosis.
25. Patients with any form of HE may experience an increased risk of
exercise-induced injury. Supervision by exercise professionals,
caregivers, or other surrogates is key to prevent exercise-related
adverse events.

As a neuropsychiatric syndrome that considers motor skills
and mobility function, it is not surprising to ﬁnd that there is
a strong association between HE and muscle health/physical ﬁtness (246–249), and that physical and cognitive changes can
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

605

606

Bajaj et al

occur simultaneously and progress or regress in parallel
(250–252). Approximately 40%–50% of patients with HE have
either sarcopenia or frailty, signiﬁcantly higher than expected by
chance (253,254). Patients with cirrhosis and myosteatosis (fat
inﬁltration into muscle) (255) are 2 times more likely to have
a history of HE (32% vs 15% according to a systematic review of 6
studies) (255). Furthermore, there is a strong association between
cognitive and physical decline at the MHE/CHE stage, and they
follow parallel and interdependent trajectories (i.e., cognitive
decline potentiates physical decline and vice versa). Multiple
pathophysiologic mechanisms link impaired muscle health and
HE (i.e., muscle-brain axis), discovered after initial observations
30 years ago (109,256). These include hyperammonemia-related
changes, alterations in the microbiome (gut-muscle-brain axis),
decreased glutamine synthetase scavenging of ammonia by
skeletal muscle, chronic inﬂammation, and micronutrient deﬁciency (e.g., L-carnitine, thiamine, leucine, and zinc). Impaired
muscle health leads to reductions in ammonia metabolism and
hyperammonemia, which in turn can lead to further muscle
loss (109).
Given the important connection between muscle and HE, it is
recommended that all patients with HE undergo assessment of
muscle health/physical ﬁtness such as sarcopenia or physical frailty.
The concepts of sarcopenia and frailty are blurred given their
overlapping deﬁnitions and assessment tools (257). This overlap is
particularly evident in composite metrics such as the European
Working Group on Sarcopenia in Older People, the liver frailty
index (LFI), or the short physical performance battery (258).
Table 6 presents a practical toolbox for assessing muscle health and
physical ﬁtness, while Supplementary Table S2 (Supplementary
Digital Content 1, http://links.lww.com/AJG/D846) has a comprehensive summary of all major testing strategies. It is important to
repeat these measures throughout the clinical course. The delta or
diﬀerence between measurements carries signiﬁcant prognostic
information (266,267) and can be more accurately captured using
objective assessments as compared with subjectively scored frailty
questionnaires. Objective measurement is also preferred over
questionnaires about physical activity because patients tend to
overestimate the activity performed (268,269). Protein needs are
increased in patients with cirrhosis (270), studies identifying
1.2 g/kg of protein per day as a threshold for a positive nitrogen
balance (271,272). Target protein intake alongside target caloric
intake with dietitian support has been associated with improved
muscle mass and less OHE and MHE (273–275) (Supplementary
Table S3, Supplementary Digital Content 1, http://links.lww.com/
AJG/D846). Increased protein intake and the provision of a lateevening snack (LES) are associated with improved muscle health
and reduced HE (276–279).
Dietary counseling is key to achieve these goals (280,281).
Cirrhosis results in a state of accelerated starvation because
reductions in hepatic glycogen reserves force the body to rely on
lipids and proteins for gluconeogenesis. As a result, fasting time
should be minimized with frequent meals, LES, and early
breakfast (273,276,277,282). Studies have associated a LES with
improved nitrogen balance (276), total body protein stores (277),
quality of life (277), and reduced HE compared with control
conditions (relative risk 0.46, P 5 0.002) (278). Although the
composition of an LES is not uniform, a combination of complex
carbohydrates and protein is suggested (279).
Branch-chained amino acids (BCAAs) (with or without agents
to prevent cataplerosis, e.g., LOLA) and essential amino acids
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

have been inconsistently linked to improvements in HE and
muscle health/physical ﬁtness (283). Across a systematic review
of 16 RCT evaluating BCAA in HE (12 OHE, 4 trials MHE),
a signiﬁcant reduction in HE was seen over a follow-up duration
ranging from 1 to 104 weeks (RR 0.73) (110,284). As BCAA are
found in protein containing foods, long-term BCAA supplementation is not necessary unless needs cannot be met by food
alone (284). However, a recent trial did not show a major impact
of BCAAs (285).
Small studies (10 patients or less) have evaluated the impact of
vegetable-based protein, the majority demonstrating improvements including in psychometric testing, beneﬁcial EEG changes,
and reduced serum ammonia (286–289). The substitution of
a single meat-based meal with a vegan or vegetarian alternative
was associated with decreased postprandial ammonia (290).
Pathophysiologic rationale has included increased ﬁber and stool
bulk, beneﬁcial alterations in the composition and activity of the
intestinal microbiota allowing for increased ammonia excretion,
and increases in arginine that facilitate urea synthesis (286).
Other amino acid-based supplements have also been evaluated,
with evolving evidence for HE reduction, including β-hydroxyβ-methylbutyrate (291,292), acetyl-L-carnitine (108), and
L-ornithine L-aspartate (107,293). Probiotics were also found to
decrease the risk of falls along with betterment of cognitive and
physical ﬁtness metrics in one RCT (294).
Measures to improve sarcopenia and frailty for HE

Despite the multiple beneﬁts that exercise can bring to patients
with cirrhosis and portal hypertension (Supplementary Table S4,
Supplementary Digital Content 1, http://links.lww.com/AJG/
D846), incorporating exercise to the HE therapeutic armamentarium has been met with skepticism. Most of the exercise clinical
trials have included diet as a cointervention (237). As an example,
in a recent meta-analysis, 90% of studies included a dietary maneuver (295). As such, it is recommended to coprescribe exercise
with a nutritional regimen, with close monitoring of adherence,
ideally through specialized (p)rehabilitation clinics (296).
Regarding safety of exercise in patients with HE, hyperammonemia is an expected response to anaerobic exercising
conditions (similarly to hyperlactatemia), but no OHE episodes
were observed when studied systematically (297). Furthermore,
exercise clinical trials have not reported on incidental OHE
among exercisers—including a systematic review—even for
patients with prior OHE or MHE at enrollment. Finally, narrative
and systematic reviews have deemed exercise to be safe for
patients with decompensated cirrhosis with no increased risk for
exercise-related injuries (298,299). Notwithstanding, there is
a potential risk of self-injury from the motor skills and response
time limitations caused by any degree of HE (300). Thus, for
patients with HE, it is of paramount importance for caregivers to
make themselves available and provide support during exercise
training. Their involvement increases adherence to an exercise/
dietary prescription while decreasing the risk of self-injury/falls.
Importantly, the 3 studies that assessed hepatic hemodynamics before and after an exercise 6 dietary intervention
showed a reduced hepatic venous pressure gradient (301–303).
As such, lifestyle modiﬁcation interventions focused on exercise/
nutrition seem to stabilize portal hypertension and decrease its
clinical burden. Exercise interventions also expose patients with
HE to many comaneuvers that further support their cognitive
health, such as mental engagement, attention shifts, social
VOLUME 121 | MARCH 2026 www.amjgastro.com

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

ACG Hepatic Encephalopathy Guideline

Table 6. Practical strategies for testing skeletal muscle health and physical fitness
Test

Parameter description

Benefits

Caveats

Association with HE

Anatomic sarcopenia and myosteatosis
CT/MRI from HCC
surveillance studies

Cross-sectional area or volume of
all muscles at L2 or L3 (skeletal
muscle index), psoas (PMI), or
thigh

Accurate
SMI and psoas area are
the most commonly
studied

Radiation 11 (CT)
Postprocessing
Cost

Low SMI or PMI are associated with
HE (259,260) and ↑ risk of
incidental overt HE (246,261)

MAMC

Uses mid-arm circumference and
triceps skinfold for calculation

Bedside test

Operator dependency
Device cost 1

Low handgrip associated with HE
(262)

Isometric strength

Bedside test
Easy to implement

Device cost 1

Low handgrip associated with HE
(262,263) and ↑ risk of incidental
overt HE (264)

Slower gait associated with HE
(265)

Skeletal muscle strength
Handgrip

Measures of physical performance
Gait speed

Usual walking speed over a specific Bedside test
distance
Easy to implement

Requires walking

Balance

Time (#10 sec) able to stand with
feet together, in tandem, and
semitandem

Bedside test
Easy to implement

Requires ability to stand up Not studied

Chair stands

Time to execute x number of chair
stands or number of chair stand
per unit of time

Bedside test
Easy to implement

Requires ability to stand up Longer time ↑ risk of incidental
overt HE (15)

TUG

Time needed to stand up from
a chair, walk 3 m, come back,
and sit down again

Bedside test
Easy to implement

Requires ability to stand up Prolonged TUG associated with HE
(35)

Handgrip 1 balance 1 chair
stands

Bedside test
Easy to implement
Improves with exercise

Requires ability to stand up Low LFI ↑ risk of incidental overt HE
Device cost 1
(249)

Composite scores
LFI

CT, computed tomography; HCC, hepatocellular cancer; HE, hepatic encephalopathy; LFI, liver frailty index; MAMC, mid arm muscle circumference; PMI, psoas muscle
index; SMI, skeletal muscle index; TUG, timed up and go.

contact, community exposure, and navigation. Furthermore, fatigue, which is associated with hyperammonemia, has been improved by exercise (302,304–306), along with vitality (303,307)
and overall mental or physical health scores of SF-36 (308).
However, this is not a consistent ﬁnding (301,309).
In an RCT of 101 men with cirrhosis (80.5% Child Pugh B/C)
and low testosterone levels, intramuscular testosterone undeconoate replacement resulted in improved glucose metabolism and
increased muscle mass and decreased fat mass as evaluated using
dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry. There were no signiﬁcant differences in the severity of HE during the study period, and mortality was also nonsigniﬁcant (310). A 2024 multicenter doubleblind phase 2 trial evaluated the impact of 24 weeks of the oral
androgen receptor agonist ARA-LPCN 1148 in 29 male participants with sarcopenia and cirrhosis awaiting liver transplant.
Signiﬁcant improvements were seen in sarcopenia as measured by
the L3-skeletal muscle index, alongside less episodes of OHE as
compared with placebo, but no change in the EncephalApp Stroop
test as compared with placebo (311). Although these results are
promising for muscle health and physical ﬁtness, clinical trials
addressing OHE as an endpoint are still lacking.
© 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology

Medical treatments being tested or not currently approved for
HE are summarized in Table 7.

HE IN THE CONTEXT OF TIPS
Recommendations
22. We recommend initiating rifaximin therapy 14 days before
elective TIPS insertion and continuing for at least 6 months in
patients with decompensated cirrhosis with or without a prior
episode of OHE to decrease the risk of recurrent or de novo OHE
(strong recommendation, moderate certainty of evidence).
23. We suggest embolizing extrahepatic collaterals at the time of
TIPS to reduce post-TIPS HE (conditional recommendation, low
certainty of evidence).

HE occurs in 30%–40% of patients after TIPS and is associated
with poor HRQoL and prognosis (324,325). There is also refractory
post-TIPS HE that occurs in 3%–7% of patients with most cases
occurring when the portal-systemic gradient decreases by .60%
post TIPS (326,327). There is no impact of systemic inﬂammation
but some eﬀect of sarcopenia and pre-TIPS cognitive performance
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

607

608

Bajaj et al

Table 7. Medical therapies under investigation or previously tested for HE
Modality

Potential mechanism of action

Stages of HE tested

Current stage of development

More comments

Gut-brain axis
Rifaximin solid
soluble dispersion
(137)

Altered microbial function and Prevention of HE development Phase 3 multicenter trial
enhancement of bile acid
Reduction in time spent
topline results show no
profiles
confused inpatient HE
significant effect on first HE
prevention (360)

Trials in decompensated cirrhosis
to prevent further
decompensation and first HE
episode are negative

Fecal microbiota
transplant
(189–192,312)

Microbial structure and
function change

Prevention of HE recurrence

Phase 1 to phase 2a

Larger studies needed but signal
for safety, cognitive
improvement, and reduced HE
recurrence

Defined bacterial
consortium (313)

Microbial structure and
function change

Prevention of HE recurrence

Phase 1

Larger studies needed

Rifamycin SV MMX
(98)

Microbial structure and
function change

Minimal HE

Phase 2

Improved sarcopenia,
inflammation, and microbial
profile but not cognitive testing

Microbial structure and
Probiotic mixtures
function change
(including mixtures
known as VSL#3
before)
(100,101,314–316)

Minimal/covert HE
Prevention of overt HE

Phase 2

Not approved for HE; prevented
readmissions

Lactobacillus GG
(317)

Microbial structure and
function change

Minimal HE

Phase 2

Improved endotoxemia and
microbial profile but not cognitive
testing

Androgen agonist

Prevention of HE recurrence

Phase 2

Only for men with reduced HE
recurrence

Ornithine
Ammonia scavenger
phenylacetate (318)

Inpatients with HE to reduce
time spent in confusional
state

Phase 2

Not effective but if limited to those
with true hyperammonemia
would be successful

Glycerol
phenylbutyrate
(138)

Ammonia scavenger

Prevention of HE recurrence

Phase 2

Successful but not in those with
concomitant rifaximin; not being
developed further

Anti-inflammatory
Reduce endothelial
dysfunction

Minimal/covert HE
Inpatient HE
Prevention of overt HE

Phases 2–3

Not specifically approved for HE
prevention or treatment

GABA-A receptor-modulating
steroid antagonist

Minimal/covert HE

Phase 2

Reduced impact of sleepiness and
fatigue

Sarcopenia prevention
LPCN 1148 (313)
Ammonia scavenger

Anti-inflammatory
IV Albumin
(167,319–322)
Neuro-steroid alteration
Golexanolone (323)

HE, hepatic encephalopathy.

in predicting the development of post-TIPS HE (328). There are
multiple factors that inﬂuence the development of post-TIPS HE,
including increased age, worse liver function, hyponatremia, preTIPS SPSSs, HE history, larger stent diameter, increased portal
pressure gradient reduction, and sarcopenia (329). There is substantial literature evaluating the impact of sarcopenia on post-TIPS
HE (330,331). TIPS can result in improvements in muscle mass
(332) potentially on the basis of portal pressure reduction, ascites
resolution, and improvements in dietary absorption. Those
patients who improve their sarcopenia post-TIPS have a lower risk
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

of HE postprocedure (333–336). Although further evaluation is
required, body fat distribution may also play a role in post-TIPS HE
with increased risk of HE seen in those with alterations in body fat
distribution pre-TIPS (low visceral fat in males and low subcutaneous fat in females) (337), and a lower risk seen in those with
improvements in the subcutaneous adipose tissue index (338).
Preventing post-TIPS HE using lactulose or lactitol in smaller
studies was unsuccessful compared with placebo (339). Embolization of extrahepatic collaterals may also decrease post-TIPS HE
(243,244,340). However, a larger RCT with rifaximin pre-TIPS

VOLUME 121 | MARCH 2026 www.amjgastro.com

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

ACG Hepatic Encephalopathy Guideline

was able to reduce post-TIPS HE occurrence signiﬁcantly over
placebo (341). This study with prophylactic rifaximin involved
mostly refractory ascites patients with alcohol use as the etiology.
Once HE occurs, the treatment is similar to non-TIPS HE including lactulose and rifaximin. However, if unsuccessful or refractory, reducing the TIPS diameter through ballooning or
placing a smaller TIPS within a TIPS can dramatically reduce the
diameter and improve the cause of HE (326). Ultimately, liver
tranplant (LT) should be considered in these patients if clinically
appropriate.

LIVER TRANSPLANT AND HE
Recommendation
24. For patients with multiple HE episodes and MELD score ,15,
we suggest evaluating candidacy for living donor liver
transplantation (conditional recommendation, low certainty of
evidence).

Key concepts
26. Adding 4–5 MELD points regardless of the MELD score iteration
used more accurately reflects the 90-day mortality of inpatient
OHE and outpatient CHE.
27. As multiple HE episodes lead to persistent cognitive impairment
which may not recover after LT, early LT could have additional
benefits to improve brain function.
28. Early evaluation for liver transplantation should be considered in
patients with high MELD3.0 scores, severe HE (grades III–IV), or
frequent HE episodes, to improve long-term outcomes.
29. Persistent confusion in an inpatient setting is a relative
contraindication to transplant

Since the changeover from the Child score to MELD and
subsequent iterations for liver transplant priority in the
United States, HE is not given extra priority points (342). The
latest iteration of MELD, the MELD3.0, still does not take HE into
account for organ allocation. This omission could lead to underestimation of the true illness of how chronic liver disease in
patients with HE aﬀects their prioritization on the transplant
waitlist. Although the prior HE guidelines state that HE alone is
not considered an indication for LT unless it is associated with
poor liver function (11), severe HE (grades 3–4) has been shown
to signiﬁcantly increase 90-day waitlist mortality, independent of
the MELD score (343,344). Further studies suggest that patients
with MELD scores between 30 and 34 and severe HE have similar
mortality rates to those with MELD scores $35 without HE,
indicating that HE should be considered in the allocation system
(343,345). Therefore, patients with HE should be referred for
transplant evaluation.
Therefore, although HE is not currently prioritized adequately
in the MELD system, there is substantial evidence supporting its
inclusion to better reﬂect the severity of liver disease and improve
outcomes for these patients by improving the allocation system. A
study by Lucidi et al found that incorporating HE into the original
MELD score by the addition of 7 points in patients with HE
optimally predicted 6-month mortality (346). Silvey et al also
supported the addition of 4–5 points to the MELD3.0 score for
patients with documented inpatient OHE to enhance mortality
prediction (347). Although CHE is less severe than OHE, it has
© 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology

independently been associated with poor survival and increased
risk of hospitalization. Patidar et al found that patients with CHE
had a higher risk of developing OHE, hospitalization, and death
or transplant, even after controlling for MELD score and using
critical ﬂicker frequency additional MELD points would be
needed to counter the impact of HE exclusion (40,79). Therefore,
it could be suggested that CHE also contributes to the overall
severity of liver disease and should be considered in the prognostic assessment in conjunction with the MELD score.
In addition to mortality, preserving brain function and daily
function that would be lost with recurrent HE pre-LT, are major
reasons for improving access to LT for patients with HE. Multiple
HE episodes lead to cumulative and potentially irreversible cognitive deﬁcits (348–352). Patients with severe pretransplant HE
(grades 3–4) have been shown to have lower overall post-LT
survival compared with those without HE. This increased mortality is primarily observed within the ﬁrst year post-LT and is
largely attributed to higher rates of infection-related deaths
among patients with severe HE (353). Furthermore, severe pretransplant HE is associated with longer hospital stays post-LT,
independent of other factors including the MELD score due to
higher postoperative complications and morbidity (354). Neurological complications are also more common in these patients
with higher risk for perioperative neurological events, such as
altered mental status and seizures, which can further complicate
recovery and prolong hospital stays (355,356). Despite overall
improvements, a persistent deﬁcit can remain in patients with
a history of OHE pre-LT particularly in domains such as attention, executive function, and psychomotor speed (355,356). It
may also be observed that overall brain volume and function in
pretransplant HE is associated with reduced brain volume and
neuronal markers, which may not fully normalize post-LT (356).
Hence, severe pre-LT HE could potentially lead to cognitive inﬂexibility and learning deﬁcits post LT. In one study, patients with
HE showed impaired learning and cognitive ﬂexibility, which can
improve post-LT but may not reach the levels seen in patients
without HE (357). As transplantation is the only deﬁnitive
treatment for HE, patients who are candidates should be
promptly evaluated and consideration of transplant urgently
discussed (8) because LT improves cognitive function (349). With
early evaluation and listing in patients with frequent HE episodes,
we could mitigate the high morbidity and healthcare burden
(QoL) associated with recurrent HE, ultimately improving longterm outcomes (8,11).
Operationalization of HE diagnosis is diﬃcult because of the
subjective nature of the diagnosis. Studies have used cognitive
testing and evidence of hospitalizations for inpatient HE management as benchmarks (79,346,347). However, more data are
needed to address potential gaming of the system if additional
points are awarded. Validated and reproducible inpatient diagnosis of HE is needed to ensure objectivity for transplant prioritization, and a recent study of natural language processing has
shown promise (358). In addition, as recommended in the ACG
ACLF guidelines, patients whose confusion does not get better
despite adequate treatment are likely not appropriate candidates
for LT due to a high potential of persistently poor brain recovery
post-LT (171).
An alternative to extra points for deceased donor liver transplant is living donor LT (LDLT), which could oﬀer a survival
beneﬁt for patients with low MELD scores (359). This survival
beneﬁt is particularly relevant for patients with recurrent HE
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

609

610

Bajaj et al

because timely transplantation can prevent further cognitive
decline and improve overall prognosis. Moreover, early transplantation in patients with frequent HE episodes can mitigate the
high morbidity associated with recurrent HE, leading to better
long-term cognitive outcomes and quality of life. Therefore, incorporating LDLT as a viable option for these patients can significantly enhance their chances of survival and recovery. LDLT could
be considered for patients with multiple episodes of HE and low
MELD scores to improve long-term outcomes, reduce mortality,
and enhance quality of life.

CONCLUSIONS
HE in cirrhosis is a multiorgan disorder of gut-brain axis that has
a major negative impact on patients, caregivers, medical systems,
and society. The pathogenesis, symptoms, eﬀect on clinical and
psychosocial function, and need for a multidisciplinary
approach to manage this condition, are highlighted. Although
current diagnostic and management strategies have made major
strides, gaps remain in the appropriate identiﬁcation of HE and to
treat patients who are not responsive to currently available
therapies. In addition, the impact of HE on liver transplant eligibility needs further elucidation. Novel targets focused on the
gut-brain axis, sarcopenia, ammonia, and brain neuro-steroids
are being investigated.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Nancy Reau for being the monitor for the ACG Practice
Parameters Committee.

3.
4.
5.

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

12.
13.
14.
15.

CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

Guarantor of the article: Jasmohan S. Bajaj, MD, MS, FACG.
Speciﬁc author contributions: JSB conceptualized and was
associated with all aspects. All authors contributed towards the
writing and review of the guideline; RW and VC were GRADE
experts.
Financial support: None.
Potential competing interests: JSB has received institutional grant
support from Bausch, Grifols, and Sequana. ABJ has received
consulting fees from Gilead Sciences, Inc., Ipsen, Salix
Pharmaceuticals, and Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals; and has
received speaking fees from Madrigal Pharmaceuticals, Salix
Pharmaceuticals, and Mallinckrodt Pharmaceuticals. RSR has
received institutional research support from Mallinckrodt
Pharmaceuticals and Salix Pharmaceuticals. P-HC has received
instituional research support from Gilead Sciences. RJW is
a consultant for Gilead Sciences and Salix, and has received grant
support from Durect Corperation, Madrigal Pharmaceuticals, and
Thera Technologies. EBT has received consulting fees from
Norvartis, Axcella, and Allergan; has served on advisory boards for
Ipsen, Mallinckrodt, Bausch Health, Kaleido, Novo Nordisk; and has
received unrestricted research grants from Gilead and Valeant. PT
has received speakers fees from Abbvie. All other authors have no
disclosures.

16.
17.
18.

19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.

REFERENCES
1.
2.

Guyatt G, Oxman AD, Akl EA, et al. GRADE guidelines: 1.
Introduction-GRADE evidence proﬁles and summary of ﬁndings tables.
J Clin Epidemiol 2011;64(4):383–94.
Balshem H, Helfand M, Sch¨unemann HJ, et al. GRADE guidelines: 3.
Rating the quality of evidence. J Clin Epidemiol 2011;64(4):401–6.

The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

26.
27.

Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. GRADE: An emerging consensus
on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ
2008;336(7650):924–6.
Sultan S, Falck-Ytter Y, Inadomi JM. The AGA institute process for
developing clinical practice guidelines part one: Grading the evidence.
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2013;11(4):329–32.
Andrews JC, Sch¨unemann HJ, Oxman AD, et al. GRADE guidelines: 15.
Going from evidence to recommendation-determinants of
a recommendation’s direction and strength. J Clin Epidemiol 2013;
66(7):726–35.
H¨aussinger D, Dhiman RK, Felipo V, et al. Hepatic encephalopathy. Nat
Rev Dis Primers 2022;8(1):43.
Rose CF, Amodio P, Bajaj JS, et al. Hepatic encephalopathy: Novel insights into
classiﬁcation, pathophysiology and therapy. J Hepatol 2020;73(6):1526–47.
Acharya C, Bajaj JS. Hepatic encephalopathy and liver transplantation:
The past, present, and future toward equitable access. Liver Transpl
2021;27(12):1830–43.
Bajaj JS. The three villages of hepatic encephalopathy. Am J
Gastroenterol 2021;116(6):1184–6.
European Association for the Study of the Liver. EASL clinical practice
guidelines on the management of hepatic encephalopathy. J Hepatol
2022;77(3):807–24.
Vilstrup H, Amodio P, Bajaj J, et al. Hepatic encephalopathy in chronic
liver disease: 2014 practice guideline by the American Association for the
Study of Liver Diseases and the European Association for the Study of
the Liver. Hepatology 2014;60(2):715–35.
Kreuter MW, Thompson T, McQueen A, et al. Addressing social needs
in health care settings: Evidence, challenges, and opportunities for public
health. Annu Rev Public Health 2021;42:329–44.
Sanyal AJ, Van Natta ML, Clark J, et al. Prospective study of outcomes in
adults with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. N Engl J Med 2021;385(17):
1559–69.
Gairing SJ, Schleicher EM, Galle PR, et al. Prediction and prevention of
the ﬁrst episode of overt hepatic encephalopathy in patients with
cirrhosis. Hepatol Commun 2023;7(4):e0096.
Tapper EB, Zhao L, Nikirk S, et al. Incidence and bedside predictors of
the ﬁrst episode of overt hepatic encephalopathy in patients with
cirrhosis. Am J Gastroenterol 2020;115(12):2017–25.
Tapper EB, Parikh ND, Sengupta N, et al. A risk score to predict the
development of hepatic encephalopathy in a population-based cohort of
patients with cirrhosis. Hepatology 2018;68(4):1498–507.
Jones BI, Jenkins CA, Murphy D, et al. Predicting hepatic
encephalopathy in patients with cirrhosis: A UK population–based
study and validation of risk scores. Hepatol Commun 2023;7(11):e0307.
GBD 2017 Cirrhosis Collaborators. The global, regional, and national
burden of cirrhosis by cause in 195 countries and territories, 1990–2017:
A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017.
Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol 2020;5(3):245–66.
Afridi F, Mittal A, Pyrsopoulos N. Trends in mortality and health care
burden of cirrhotic decompensation in hospitalized patients: A
nationwide analysis. J Clin Gastroenterol 2023;57(7):743–7.
Bajaj JS, Reddy KR, Tandon P, et al. The 3-month readmission rate
remains unacceptably high in a large North American cohort of patients
with cirrhosis. Hepatology 2016;64(1):200–8.
Tapper EB, Halbert B, Mellinger J. Rates of and reasons for hospital
readmissions in patients with cirrhosis: A multistate population-based
cohort study. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;14(8):1181–8.e2.
Jesudian AB, Gagnon-Sanschagrin P, Heimanson Z, et al. Impact of rifaximin
use following an initial overt hepatic encephalopathy hospitalization on
rehospitalization and costs. J Med Econ 2023;26(1):1169–77.
Hareendran A, Devadas K, Sreesh S, et al. Quality of life, caregiver
burden and mental health disorders in primary caregivers of patients
with cirrhosis. Liver Int 2020;40(12):2939–49.
Bajaj JS, Wade JB, Gibson DP, et al. The multi-dimensional burden of
cirrhosis and hepatic encephalopathy on patients and caregivers. Am J
Gastroenterol 2011;106(9):1646–53.
Saleh ZM, Salim NE, Nikirk S, et al. The emotional burden of caregiving
for patients with cirrhosis. Hepatol Commun 2022;6(10):2827–35.
Fabrellas N, Moreira R, Carol M, et al. Psychological burden of hepatic
encephalopathy on patients and caregivers. Clin Transl Gastroenterol
2020;11(4):e00159.
Louissaint J, Tapper EB. Hepatic encephalopathy: A diagnosis for the
individual but an experience for the household. Clin Transl
Gastroenterol 2020;11(5):e00181.

VOLUME 121 | MARCH 2026 www.amjgastro.com

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

ACG Hepatic Encephalopathy Guideline

28. Bajaj JS, Lauridsen M, Tapper EB, et al. Important unresolved questions
in the management of hepatic encephalopathy: An ISHEN consensus.
Am J Gastroenterol 2020;115(7):989–1002.
29. Reuter B, Walter K, Bissonnette J, et al. Assessment of the spectrum of hepatic
encephalopathy: A multicenter study. Liver Transpl 2018;24(5):587–94.
30. Jover R, Compañy L, Guti´errez A, et al. Minimal hepatic encephalopathy
and extrapyramidal signs in patients with cirrhosis. Am J Gastroenterol
2003;98(7):1599–604.
31. Joebges EM, Heidemann M, Schimke N, et al. Bradykinesia in minimal
hepatic encephalopathy is due to disturbances in movement initiation.
J Hepatol 2003;38(3):273–80.
32. Butz M, Timmermann L, Braun M, et al. Motor impairment in liver
cirrhosis without and with minimal hepatic encephalopathy. Acta
Neurol Scand 2010;122(1):27–35.
33. Weissenborn K. The clinical relevance of minimal hepatic
encephalopathy: A critical look. Dig Dis 2015;33(4):555–61.
34. Ortiz M, C´ordoba J, Jacas C, et al. Neuropsychological abnormalities in
cirrhosis include learning impairment. J Hepatol 2006;44(1):104–10.
35. Nardelli S, Gioia S, Ridola L, et al. Risk of falls in patients with cirrhosis
evaluated by timed up and go test: Does muscle or brain matter more?
Dig Liver Dis 2022;54(3):371–7.
36. Soriano G, Rom´an E, C´ordoba J, et al. Cognitive dysfunction in cirrhosis is
associated with falls: A prospective study. Hepatology 2012;55(6):1922–30.
37. Rom´an E, C´ordoba J, Torrens M, et al. Minimal hepatic encephalopathy
is associated with falls. Am J Gastroenterol 2011;106(3):476–82.
38. Wein C, Koch H, Popp B, et al. Minimal hepatic encephalopathy impairs
ﬁtness to drive. Hepatology 2004;39(3):739–45.
39. Bajaj JS, Saeian K, Schubert CM, et al. Minimal hepatic encephalopathy
is associated with motor vehicle crashes: The reality beyond the driving
test. Hepatology 2009;50(4):1175–83.
40. Patidar KR, Thacker LR, Wade JB, et al. Covert hepatic encephalopathy
is independently associated with poor survival and increased risk of
hospitalization. Am J Gastroenterol 2014;109(11):1757–63.
41. Wang J, Deng MJ, Shi PM, et al. Covert hepatic encephalopathy is
associated with aggressive disease progression and poor survival in
patients with cirrhosis. J Dig Dis 2023;24(12):681–90.
42. Thomsen KL, Macnaughtan J, Tritto G, et al. Clinical and
pathophysiological characteristics of cirrhotic patients with grade 1 and
minimal hepatic encephalopathy. PLoS One 2016;11:e0146076.
43. American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases; European
Association for the Study of the Liver. Hepatic encephalopathy in
chronic liver disease: 2014 practice guideline by the European
Association for the Study of the Liver and the American Association for
the Study of Liver Diseases. J Hepatol 2014;61(3):642–59.
44. Lv XH, Lu Q, Deng K, et al. Prevalence and characteristics of covert/minimal
hepatic encephalopathy in patients with liver cirrhosis: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2024;119(4):690–9.
45. Gairing SJ, Mangini C, Zarantonello L, et al. Prevalence of minimal
hepatic encephalopathy in patients with liver cirrhosis: A multicenter
study. Am J Gastroenterol 2023;118(12):2191–200.
46. Bajaj JS, Etemadian A, Hafeezullah M, et al. Testing for minimal hepatic
encephalopathy in the United States: An AASLD survey. Hepatology
2007;45(3):833–4.
47. Labenz C, Adarkwah CC, W¨orns MA, et al. Management of hepatic
encephalopathy in Germany: A survey among physicians. Z
Gastroenterol 2020;58(1):49–56.
48. Miwa T, Hanai T, Nishimura K, et al. A simple covert hepatic
encephalopathy screening model based on blood biochemical
parameters in patients with cirrhosis. PLoS One 2022;17(11):e0277829.
49. D’Amico G, Zipprich A, Villanueva C, et al. Further decompensation in
cirrhosis: Results of a large multicenter cohort study supporting Baveno
VII statements. Hepatology 2024;79(4):869–81.
50. Sim´on-Talero M, Roccarina D, Martínez J, et al. Association between
portosystemic shunts and increased complications and mortality in
patients with cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 2018;154(6):1694–705.e4.
51. Labenz C, Toenges G, Schattenberg JM, et al. Clinical predictors for poor
quality of life in patients with covert hepatic encephalopathy. J Clin
Gastroenterol 2019;53(7):e303–7.
52. Buckholz A, Clarke L, Paik P, et al. Evaluating sleep in covert
encephalopathy with wearable technology: Results from the WATCHES
study. Hepatol Commun 2023;7(2):e0002.
53. Labenz C, Baron JS, Toenges G, et al. Prospective evaluation of the
impact of covert hepatic encephalopathy on quality of life and sleep in
cirrhotic patients. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2018;48(3):313–21.

© 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology

54. Bajaj JS, Thacker LR, Leszczyszyn D, et al. Eﬀects of obstructive sleep
apnea on sleep quality, cognition, and driving performance in patients
with cirrhosis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;13(2):390–7.e1.
55. Crespo J, Cifri´an J, Pinto JA, et al. Sleep apnea obstructive syndrome: A
new complication previously undescribed in cirrhotic patients with
ascites. Am J Gastroenterol 2003;98(12):2815–6.
56. Flud CR, Duarte-Rojo A. Prognostic implications of minimal/covert
hepatic encephalopathy: Large-scale validation cohort studies. J Clin
Exp Hepatol 2019;9(1):112–6.
57. Weissenborn K, Ennen JC, Schomerus H, et al. Neuropsychological
characterization of hepatic encephalopathy. J Hepatol 2001;34(5):
768–73.
58. Romero G´omez M, C´ordoba J, Jover R, et al. Normality tables in the
Spanish population for psychometric tests used in the diagnosis of
minimal hepatic encephalopathy [in Spanish]. Med Clin (Barc) 2006;
127(7):246–9.
59. Amodio P, Campagna F, Olianas S, et al. Detection of minimal hepatic
encephalopathy: Normalization and optimization of the Psychometric
Hepatic Encephalopathy Score. A neuropsychological and quantiﬁed
EEG study. J Hepatol 2008;49(3):346–53.
60. Duarte-Rojo A, Estradas J, Hern´andez-Ramos R, et al. Validation of the
psychometric hepatic encephalopathy score (PHES) for identifying
patients with minimal hepatic encephalopathy. Dig Dis Sci 2011;56(10):
3014–23.
61. Allampati S, Duarte-Rojo A, Thacker LR, et al. Diagnosis of minimal
hepatic encephalopathy using Stroop EncephalApp: A multicenter USbased, norm-based study. Am J Gastroenterol 2016;111(1):78–86.
62. Bajaj JS, O’Leary JG, Jakab SS, et al. Gut microbiome proﬁles to exclude
the diagnosis of hepatic encephalopathy in patients with cirrhosis. Gut
Microbes 2024;16(1):2392880.
63. Duarte-Rojo A, Ruiz-Margain A, Macias-Rodriguez RU, et al. Clinical
scenarios for the use of S100β as a marker of hepatic encephalopathy.
World J Gastroenterol 2016;22(17):4397–402.
64. Gairing SJ, Danneberg S, Kaps L, et al. Elevated serum levels of glial
ﬁbrillary acidic protein are associated with covert hepatic
encephalopathy in patients with cirrhosis. JHEP Rep 2023;5(4):100671.
65. Stawicka A, Świderska M, Zbrze´zniak J, et al. Brain-derived
neurotrophic factor as a potential diagnostic marker in minimal hepatic
encephalopathy. Clin Exp Hepatol 2021;7(1):117–24.
66. Kimer N, Gluud LL, Pedersen JS, et al. The Psychometric Hepatic
Encephalopathy Syndrome score does not correlate with blood
ammonia, endotoxins or markers of inﬂammation in patients with
cirrhosis. Transl Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021;6:8.
67. Li SW, Wang K, Yu YQ, et al. Psychometric hepatic encephalopathy
score for diagnosis of minimal hepatic encephalopathy in China. World J
Gastroenterol 2013;19(46):8745–51.
68. Gundling F, Zelihic E, Seidl H, et al. How to diagnose hepatic
encephalopathy in the emergency department. Ann Hepatol 2013;12(1):
108–14.
69. Ballester MP, Tranah TH, Balcar L, et al. Development and validation of
the AMMON-OHE model to predict risk of overt hepatic
encephalopathy occurrence in outpatients with cirrhosis. J Hepatol
2023;79(4):967–76.
70. Li X, Liu S, Guo Y, et al. Detection of minimal hepatic encephalopathy in
patients with cirrhosis based on the Stroop-CN model (NCRCIDCHESS 2106): A prospective multicenter study. MedComm (2020)
2024;5(8):e627.
71. Cunha-Silva M, Neto FLP, de Ara´ujo PS, et al. EncephalApp Stroop Test
validation for the screening of minimal hepatic encephalopathy in
Brazil. Ann Hepatol 2022;27(1):100543.
72. Kaps L, Hildebrand K, Nagel M, et al. Validation of
EncephalApp_Stroop as screening tool for the detection of minimal
hepatic encephalopathy in German patients with liver cirrhosis. Clin Res
Hepatol Gastroenterol 2022;46(4):101873.
73. Acharya C, Shaw J, Duong N, et al. QuickStroop, a shortened version of
EncephalApp, detects covert hepatic encephalopathy with similar
accuracy within one minute. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2023;21(1):
136–42.
74. Labenz C, Gairing SJ, Kaps L, et al. QuickStroop for screening for
minimal hepatic encephalopathy in patients with cirrhosis. JHEP Rep
2025;7(3):101298.
75. Campagna F, Montagnese S, Ridola L, et al. The animal naming test: An
easy tool for the assessment of hepatic encephalopathy. Hepatology
2017;66(1):198–208.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

611

612

Bajaj et al

76. Labenz C, Toenges G, Schattenberg JM, et al. Outcome prediction of
covert hepatic encephalopathy in liver cirrhosis: Comparison of four
testing strategies. Clin Transl Gastroenterol 2020;11(6):e00172.
77. Tapper EB, Kenney B, Nikirk S, et al. Animal naming test is associated
with poor patient-reported outcomes and frailty in people with and
without cirrhosis: A prospective cohort study. Clin Transl Gastroenterol
2022;13(1):e00447.
78. Agarwal A, Taneja S, Chopra M, et al. Animal Naming Test: A simple
and accurate test for diagnosis of minimal hepatic encephalopathy and
prediction of overt hepatic encephalopathy. Clin Exp Hepatol 2020;6(2):
116–24.
79. Ampuero J, Sim´on M, Montoliú C, et al. Minimal hepatic encephalopathy
and critical ﬂicker frequency are associated with survival of patients with
cirrhosis. Gastroenterology 2015;149(6):1483–9.
80. Ampuero J, Montoli´u C, Sim´on-Talero M, et al. Minimal hepatic
encephalopathy identiﬁes patients at risk of faster cirrhosis progression.
J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018;33(3):718–25.
81. Vutien P, Li R, Karkar R, et al. Evaluating a novel, portable, selfadministrable device (“beacon”) that measures critical ﬂicker frequency
as a test for hepatic encephalopathy. Am J Gastroenterol 2023;118(6):
1096–100.
82. Torlot FJ, McPhail MJ, Taylor-Robinson SD. Meta-analysis: The
diagnostic accuracy of critical ﬂicker frequency in minimal hepatic
encephalopathy. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2013;37(5):527–36.
83. Sharma P, Sharma BC, Puri V, et al. Critical ﬂicker frequency: Diagnostic
tool for minimal hepatic encephalopathy. J Hepatol 2007;47(1):67–73.
84. Barone M, Shahini E, Iannone A, et al. Critical ﬂicker frequency test
predicts overt hepatic encephalopathy and survival in patients with liver
cirrhosis. Dig Liver Dis 2018;50(5):496–500.
85. Duarte-Rojo A, Allampati S, Thacker LR, et al. Diagnosis of covert
hepatic encephalopathy: A multi-center study testing the utility of single
versus combined testing. Metab Brain Dis 2019;34(1):289–95.
86. Nadeem M, Tafader A, Park D, et al. A specialized HE testing clinic
improves rational decision-making for therapy in cirrhosis. Hepatol
Commun 2023;7(11):e0301.
87. Sultanik P, Khelouﬁ L, Leproux A, et al. Other causes of neurocognitive
impairment than covert hepatic encephalopathy (CHE) are very
frequent, either alone or associated with CHE, in cirrhotic patients with
cognitive complaints. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2024;60(6):749–64.
88. Corrias M, Turco M, Rui MD, et al. Covert hepatic encephalopathy:
Does the mini-mental state examination help? J Clin Exp Hepatol 2014;
4(2):89–93.
89. Szymkowicz SM, May PE, Weeks JW, et al. Psychometric properties of
the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) in inpatient liver
transplant candidates. Appl Neuropsychol Adult 2024;31(1):19–26.
90. Bajaj JS, Duarte-Rojo A, Xie JJ, et al. Minimal hepatic encephalopathy
and mild cognitive impairment worsen quality of life in elderly patients
with cirrhosis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2020;18(13):3008–16.e2.
91. Tapper EB, Ospina E, Salim N, et al. Lactulose therapy for patients with
cirrhosis, portal hypertension, and poor patient-reported outcomes: The
Mi-Kristal trial. Hepatology 2023;78(4):1159–67.
92. Wang JY, Bajaj JS, Wang JB, et al. Lactulose improves cognition, quality
of life, and gut microbiota in minimal hepatic encephalopathy: A
multicenter, randomized controlled trial. J Dig Dis 2019;20(10):547–56.
93. Moon AM, Kim HP, Jiang Y, et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis
on the eﬀects of lactulose and rifaximin on patient-reported outcomes in
hepatic encephalopathy. Am J Gastroenterol 2023;118(2):284–93.
94. Luo M, Li L, Lu CZ, et al. Clinical eﬃcacy and safety of lactulose for
minimal hepatic encephalopathy: A meta-analysis. Eur J Gastroenterol
Hepatol 2011;23(12):1250–7.
95. Prasad S, Dhiman RK, Duseja A, et al. Lactulose improves cognitive
functions and health-related quality of life in patients with cirrhosis who
have minimal hepatic encephalopathy. Hepatology 2007;45(3):549–59.
96. Sidhu SS, Goyal O, Parker RA, et al. Rifaximin vs. lactulose in treatment
of minimal hepatic encephalopathy. Liver Int 2016;36(3):378–85.
97. Sidhu SS, Goyal O, Mishra BP, et al. Rifaximin improves psychometric
performance and health-related quality of life in patients with minimal
hepatic encephalopathy (the RIME Trial). Am J Gastroenterol 2011;
106(2):307–16.
98. Bajaj JS, Fagan A, Gavis EA, et al. The RIVET RCT: Rifamycin SV
MMX improves muscle mass, physical function, and ammonia in
cirrhosis and minimal encephalopathy. Hepatol Commun 2024;8(2):
e0384.

The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

99. Bajaj JS, Heuman DM, Wade JB, et al. Rifaximin improves driving
simulator performance in a randomized trial of patients with minimal
hepatic encephalopathy. Gastroenterology 2011;140(2):478–87.e1.
100. Mittal VV, Sharma BC, Sharma P, et al. A randomized controlled trial
comparing lactulose, probiotics, and L-ornithine L-aspartate in
treatment of minimal hepatic encephalopathy. Eur J Gastroenterol
Hepatol 2011;23(8):725–32.
101. Sharma P, Sharma BC, Puri V, et al. An open-label randomized
controlled trial of lactulose and probiotics in the treatment of minimal
hepatic encephalopathy. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2008;20(6):
506–11.
102. Liu Q, Duan ZP, Ha DK, et al. Synbiotic modulation of gut ﬂora: Eﬀect
on minimal hepatic encephalopathy in patients with cirrhosis.
Hepatology 2004;39(5):1441–9.
103. Lauridsen MM, Mikkelsen S, Svensson T, et al. The continuous reaction
time test for minimal hepatic encephalopathy validated by a randomized
controlled multi-modal intervention-A pilot study. PLoS One 2017;
12(10):e0185412.
104. Janyajirawong R, Vilaichone RK, Sethasine S. Eﬃcacy of zinc
supplement in minimal hepatic encephalopathy: A prospective,
randomized controlled study (zinc-MHE trial). Asian Pac J Cancer Prev
2021;22(9):2879–87.
105. Burkard T, Biedermann A, Herold C, et al. Treatment with a potassiumiron-phosphate-citrate complex improves PSE scores and quality of life
in patients with minimal hepatic encephalopathy: A multicenter,
randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial. Eur J
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2013;25(3):352–8.
106. Gao J, Nie R, Chang H, et al. A meta-analysis of microbiome therapies for
hepatic encephalopathy. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2023;35(9):
927–37.
107. He Q, Mao C, Chen Z, et al. Eﬃcacy of L-ornithine L-aspartate for
minimal hepatic encephalopathy in patients with cirrhosis: A metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. Arab J Gastroenterol 2024;
25(2):84–92.
108. Martí-Carvajal AJ, Gluud C, Arevalo-Rodriguez I, et al. Acetyl-Lcarnitine for patients with hepatic encephalopathy. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2019;1:CD011451.
109. Yoon EL, Ahn SB, Jun DW, et al. Eﬀect of L-carnitine on quality of life in
covert hepatic encephalopathy: A randomized, double-blind, placebocontrolled study. Korean J Intern Med 2022;37(4):757–67.
110. Gluud LL, Dam G, Les I, et al. Branched-chain amino acids for people
with hepatic encephalopathy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017;5:
CD001939.
111. Jain L, Sharma BC, Srivastava S, et al. Serum endotoxin, inﬂammatory
mediators, and magnetic resonance spectroscopy before and after
treatment in patients with minimal hepatic encephalopathy.
J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2013;28(7):1187–93.
112. Cai XJ, Wang L, Hu CM. Eﬃcacy of diﬀerent drugs in the treatment of
minimal hepatic encephalopathy: A network meta-analysis involving
826 patients based on 10 randomized controlled trials. J Cell Biochem
2018;119:8336–45.
113. Shi J, Li F. Clinical study of probiotics combined with lactulose for
minimal hepatic encephalopathy treatment. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol
2023;35(7):777–81.
114. Katayama K, Saito M, Kawaguchi T, et al. Eﬀect of zinc on liver cirrhosis
with hyperammonemia: A preliminary randomized, placebo-controlled
double-blind trial. Nutrition 2014;30(11–12):1409–14.
115. Sharma P, Sharma BC, Agrawal A, et al. Primary prophylaxis of overt
hepatic encephalopathy in patients with cirrhosis: An open labeled
randomized controlled trial of lactulose versus no lactulose.
J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2012;27(8):1329–35.
116. Zacharias HD, Zacharias AP, Gluud LL, et al. Pharmacotherapies that
speciﬁcally target ammonia for the prevention and treatment of hepatic
encephalopathy in adults with cirrhosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2019;6:CD012334.
117. Deltenre P, Labenz C, Schuchmann M. Quality of life as a therapeutic
objective in the management of hepatic encephalopathy and the
potential role of rifaximin-α. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021;33(1S
Suppl 1):e1032–8.
118. Smith ML, Wade JB, Wolstenholme J, et al. Gut microbiome-braincirrhosis axis. Hepatology 2024;80(2):465–85.
119. Davis BC, Bajaj JS. Eﬀects of alcohol on the brain in cirrhosis: Beyond
hepatic encephalopathy. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2018;42(4):660–7.

VOLUME 121 | MARCH 2026 www.amjgastro.com

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

ACG Hepatic Encephalopathy Guideline

120. Adejumo A, Noll A, Rogal SS, et al. Dementia frequently coexists with
hepatic encephalopathy but not other cirrhosis complications in US
veterans. Am J Gastroenterol 2023;118(3):475–80.
121. Bajaj JS, Silvey SG, Rogal S, et al. Undiagnosed cirrhosis and hepatic
encephalopathy in a national cohort of veterans with dementia. JAMA
Netw Open 2024;7(1):e2353965.
122. Bajaj JS, Gentili A, Wade JB, et al. Speciﬁc challenges in geriatric cirrhosis
and hepatic encephalopathy. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2022;20(8S):
S20–9.
123. Folstein MF, Folstein SE, McHugh PR. “Mini-mental state”. A practical
method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician.
J Psychiatr Res 1975;12(3):189–98.
124. Chung F, Yegneswaran B, Liao P, et al. STOP questionnaire: A tool to
screen patients for obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology 2008;108(5):
812–21.
125. Yu L, Buysse DJ, Germain A, et al. Development of short forms from the
PROMIS sleep disturbance and Sleep-Related Impairment item banks.
Behav Sleep Med 2011;10(1):6–24.
126. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The PHQ-9: Validity of a brief
depression severity measure. J Gen Intern Med 2001;16(9):606–13.
127. Beck AT, Epstein N, Brown G, et al. An inventory for measuring clinical
anxiety: Psychometric properties. J Consult Clin Psychol 1988;56(6):
893–7.
128. Blevins CA, Weathers FW, Davis MT, et al. The posttraumatic stress
disorder checklist for DSM-5 (PCL-5): Development and initial
psychometric evaluation. J Trauma Stress 2015;28(6):489–98.
129. Skinner HA. The drug abuse screening test. Addict Behav 1982;7(4):
363–71.
130. Bush K, Kivlahan DR, McDonell MB, et al. The AUDIT alcohol
consumption questions (AUDIT-C): An eﬀective brief screening test for
problem drinking. Ambulatory Care Quality Improvement Project
(ACQUIP). Alcohol Use Disorders Identiﬁcation Test. Arch Intern Med
1998;158(16):1789–95.
131. Tapper EB, Parikh ND, Green PK, et al. Reduced incidence of hepatic
encephalopathy and higher odds of resolution associated with
eradication of HCV infection. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2020;18(5):
1197–206.e7.
132. Gairing SJ, Schleicher EM, Labenz C. Diabetes mellitus–risk factor and
potential future target for hepatic encephalopathy in patients with liver
cirrhosis? Metab Brain Dis 2023;38(5):1691–700.
133. Bajaj JS, Wade JB, Sanyal AJ. Spectrum of neurocognitive impairment in
cirrhosis: Implications for the assessment of hepatic encephalopathy.
Hepatology 2009;50(6):2014–21.
134. Conn HO, Bircher J. Hepatic Encephalopathy: Syndromes and
Therapies. Medi-Ed Press: Bloomington, IL, 1994.
135. Teasdale G, Jennett B. Assessment of coma and impaired consciousness.
A practical scale. Lancet 1974;2(7872):81–4.
136. Hassanein T, Blei AT, Perry W, et al. Performance of the hepatic
encephalopathy scoring algorithm in a clinical trial of patients with
cirrhosis and severe hepatic encephalopathy. Am J Gastroenterol 2009;
104(6):1392–400.
137. Bajaj JS, Hassanein TI, Pyrsopoulos NT, et al. Dosing of rifaximin soluble
solid dispersion tablets in adults with cirrhosis: 2 randomized, placebocontrolled trials. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2023;21(3):723–31.e9.
138. Rockey DC, Vierling JM, Mantry P, et al. Randomized, double-blind,
controlled study of glycerol phenylbutyrate in hepatic encephalopathy.
Hepatology 2014;59(3):1073–83.
139. Sundaram V, Shaikh OS. Hepatic encephalopathy: Pathophysiology and
emerging therapies. Med Clin North Am 2009;93(4):819–36, vii.
140. Tapper EB, Jiang ZG, Patwardhan VR. Reﬁning the ammonia
hypothesis: A physiology-driven approach to the treatment of hepatic
encephalopathy. Mayo Clin Proc 2015;90(5):646–58.
141. Ong JP, Aggarwal A, Krieger D, et al. Correlation between ammonia
levels and the severity of hepatic encephalopathy. Am J Med 2003;
114(3):188–93.
142. Bajaj JS, Pyrsopoulos NT, Rahimi RS, et al. Serum ammonia levels do not
correlate with overt hepatic encephalopathy severity in hospitalized
patients with cirrhosis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2024;22(9):
1950–2.e1.
143. Haj M, Rockey DC. Ammonia levels do not guide clinical management
of patients with hepatic encephalopathy caused by cirrhosis. Am J
Gastroenterol 2020;115(5):723–8.

© 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology

144. Bajaj JS, Bloom PP, Chung RT, et al. Variability and lability of ammonia
levels in healthy volunteers and patients with cirrhosis: Implications for
trial design and clinical practice. Am J Gastroenterol 2020;115(5):783–5.
145. Desplats V, Haudebourg L, Verger N, et al. Acute encephalopathy
without hyperammonemia has a diﬀerent presentation than overt HE
and displays a similarly severe prognosis. Hepatology 2025;82(6):
1480–97.
146. Rahimi RS, Rockey DC. Overuse of head computed tomography in
cirrhosis with altered mental status. Am J Med Sci 2016;351(5):459–66.
147. Yang DY, Bowron J, Ahmed M, et al. The usefulness of head computed
tomography in patients with known cirrhosis presenting to emergency
department with suspected hepatic encephalopathy. J Can Assoc
Gastroenterol 2024;7(5):346–51.
148. Donovan LM, Kress WL, Strnad LC, et al. Low likelihood of intracranial
hemorrhage in patients with cirrhosis and altered mental status. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2015;13(1):165–9.
149. Hanna A, Gill I, Imam Z, et al. Low yield of head CT in cirrhotic patients
presenting with hepatic encephalopathy. BMJ Open Gastroenterol 2021;
8(1):e000609.
150. Gluud LL, Vilstrup H, Morgan MY. Non-absorbable disaccharides
versus placebo/no intervention and lactulose versus lactitol for the
prevention and treatment of hepatic encephalopathy in people with
cirrhosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;2016(5):CD003044.
151. Bloom PP, Tapper EB. Lactulose in cirrhosis: Current understanding of
eﬃcacy, mechanism, and practical considerations. Hepatol Commun
2023;7(11):e0295.
152. Uribe M, Toledo H, Perez F, et al. Lactitol, a second-generation
disaccharide for treatment of chronic portal-systemic encephalopathy.
A double-blind, crossover, randomized clinical trial. Dig Dis Sci 1987;
32(12):1345–53.
153. Sharma BC, Sharma P, Agrawal A, et al. Secondary prophylaxis of
hepatic encephalopathy: An open-label randomized controlled trial of
lactulose versus placebo. Gastroenterology 2009;137(3):885–91, 891.e1.
154. Duong NK, Shrestha S, Park D, et al. Bristol stool scale as a determinant
of hepatic encephalopathy management in patients with cirrhosis. Am J
Gastroenterol 2022;117(2):295–300.
155. van der Spoel JI, Oudemans-van Straaten HM, Kuiper MA, et al.
Laxation of critically ill patients with lactulose or polyethylene glycol: A
two-center randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Crit
Care Med 2007;35(12):2726–31.
156. Bajaj JS, Sanyal AJ, Bell D, et al. Predictors of the recurrence of hepatic
encephalopathy in lactulose-treated patients. Aliment Pharmacol Ther
2010;31(9):1012–7.
157. Rahimi RS, Singal AG, Cuthbert JA, et al. Lactulose vs polyethylene
glycol 3350--electrolyte solution for treatment of overt hepatic
encephalopathy: The HELP randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med
2014;174(11):1727–33.
158. Shehata HH, Elfert AA, Abdin AA, et al. Randomized controlled trial of
polyethylene glycol versus lactulose for the treatment of overt hepatic
encephalopathy. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018;30(12):1476–81.
159. Van Waes L, van Egmond J, Demeulenaere L. Emergency treatment of
portal-systemic encephalopathy with lactulose enemas. A controlled
study. Acta Clin Belg 1979;34(3):122–9.
160. Uribe M, Campollo O, Vargas F, et al. Acidifying enemas (lactitol and
lactose) vs. nonacidifying enemas (tap water) to treat acute portalsystemic encephalopathy: A double-blind, randomized clinical trial.
Hepatology 1987;7(4):639–43.
161. Bass NM, Mullen KD, Sanyal A, et al. Rifaximin treatment in hepatic
encephalopathy. N Engl J Med 2010;362(12):1071–81.
162. Bajaj JS. Review article: Potential mechanisms of action of rifaximin in
the management of hepatic encephalopathy and other complications of
cirrhosis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2016;43(Suppl 1):11–26.
163. Zacharias HD, Kamel F, Tan J, et al. Rifaximin for prevention and
treatment of hepatic encephalopathy in people with cirrhosis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2023;7:CD011585.
164. Fu J, Gao Y, Shi L. Combination therapy with rifaximin and lactulose in
hepatic encephalopathy: A systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS
One 2022;17(4):e0267647.
165. Sharma BC, Sharma P, Lunia MK, et al. A randomized, double-blind,
controlled trial comparing rifaximin plus lactulose with lactulose alone
in treatment of overt hepatic encephalopathy. Am J Gastroenterol 2013;
108(9):1458–63.

The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

613

614

Bajaj et al

166. Sharma BC, Singh J, Srivastava S, et al. Randomized controlled trial
comparing lactulose plus albumin versus lactulose alone for treatment of
hepatic encephalopathy. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017;32(6):1234–9.
167. Sim´on-Talero M, García-Martínez R, Torrens M, et al. Eﬀects of intravenous
albumin in patients with cirrhosis and episodic hepatic encephalopathy: A
randomized double-blind study. J Hepatol 2013;59(6):1184–92.
168. Guevara M, Baccaro ME, Torre A, et al. Hyponatremia is a risk factor of
hepatic encephalopathy in patients with cirrhosis: A prospective study
with time-dependent analysis. Am J Gastroenterol 2009;104(6):1382–9.
169. Ullah H, Shabana H, Rady MA, et al. Hypokalemia as a responsible factor
related with the severity of hepatic encephalopathy: A wide multination
cross-sectional study. Ann Med Surg (Lond) 2023;85(6):2427–31.
170. Xu L, Ying S, Hu J, et al. Pneumonia in patients with cirrhosis: Risk
factors associated with mortality and predictive value of prognostic
models. Respir Res 2018;19(1):242.
171. Bajaj JS, O’Leary JG, Lai JC, et al. Acute-on-chronic liver failure clinical
guidelines. Am J Gastroenterol 2022;117(2):225–52.
172. Ward JA, Yerke J, Lumpkin M, et al. Evaluation of a protocol for
rifaximin discontinuation in critically ill patients with liver disease
receiving broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy. World J Hepatol 2023;
15(11):1226–36.
173. Tsai IJ, Hwu WL, Huang SC, et al. Eﬃcacy and safety of intermittent
hemodialysis in infants and young children with inborn errors of
metabolism. Pediatr Nephrol 2014;29(1):111–6.
174. Kribben A, Gerken G, Haag S, et al. Eﬀects of fractionated plasma
separation and adsorption on survival in patients with acute-on-chronic
liver failure. Gastroenterology 2012;142(4):782–9.e3.
175. Karvellas CJ, Subramanian RM. Current evidence for extracorporeal
liver support systems in acute liver failure and acute-on-chronic liver
failure. Crit Care Clin 2016;32(3):439–51.
176. Laleman W, Simon-Talero M, Maleux G, et al. Embolization of large
spontaneous portosystemic shunts for refractory hepatic
encephalopathy: A multicenter survey on safety and eﬃcacy. Hepatology
2013;57(6):2448–57.
177. Agrawal A, Sharma BC, Sharma P, et al. Secondary prophylaxis of
hepatic encephalopathy in cirrhosis: An open-label, randomized
controlled trial of lactulose, probiotics, and no therapy. Am J
Gastroenterol 2012;107(7):1043–50.
178. Ganapathy D, Acharya C, Lachar J, et al. The patient buddy app can
potentially prevent hepatic encephalopathy-related readmissions. Liver
Int 2017;37(12):1843–51.
179. Sordi Chara B, Hara KS, Penrice D, et al. Artiﬁcial intelligence–enabled stool
analysis for lactulose titration assistance in hepatic encephalopathy through
a smartphone application. Am J Gastroenterol 2024;119(5):982–6.
180. Fagan A, Gallagher ML, Mousel T, et al. Artiﬁcial intelligence evaluation
of stool quality guides management of hepatic encephalopathy using
a smartphone app. Am J Gastroenterol 2024;119(5):977–81.
181. Kimer N, Krag A, Møller S, et al. Systematic review with meta-analysis:
The eﬀects of rifaximin in hepatic encephalopathy. Aliment Pharmacol
Ther 2014;40(2):123–32.
182. Sanyal AJ, Kowdley KV, Reau NS, et al. Rifaximin plus lactulose versus
lactulose alone for reducing the risk of HE recurrence. Hepatol Commun
2024;8(6):e0436.
183. Neﬀ GW, Jones M, Broda T, et al. Durability of rifaximin response in
hepatic encephalopathy. J Clin Gastroenterol 2012;46(2):168–71.
184. Leevy CB, Phillips JA. Hospitalizations during the use of rifaximin versus
lactulose for the treatment of hepatic encephalopathy. Dig Dis Sci 2007;
52(3):737–41.
185. Bajaj JS, O’Leary JG, Tandon P, et al. Targets to improve quality of care
for patients with hepatic encephalopathy: Data from a multi-centre
cohort. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2019;49(12):1518–27.
186. Sherman Z, Wahid N, Wagner M, et al. Integration of cirrhosis best
practices into electronic medical record documentation associated with
reduction in 30-day mortality following hospitalization. J Clin
Gastroenterol 2023;57(9):951–5.
187. Tapper EB, Finkelstein D, Mittleman MA, et al. A quality improvement
initiative reduces 30-day rate of readmission for patients with cirrhosis.
Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;14(5):753–9.
188. Louissaint J, Grzyb K, Bashaw L, et al. An electronic decision support
intervention reduces readmissions for patients with cirrhosis. Am J
Gastroenterol 2022;117(3):491–4.
189. Bajaj JS, Kassam Z, Fagan A, et al. Fecal microbiota transplant from
a rational stool donor improves hepatic encephalopathy: A randomized
clinical trial. Hepatology 2017;66(6):1727–38.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

190. Bajaj JS, Salzman NH, Acharya C, et al. Fecal microbial transplant
capsules are safe in hepatic encephalopathy: A phase 1, randomized,
placebo-controlled trial. Hepatology 2019;70(5):1690–703.
191. Bloom PP, Donlan J, Torres Soto M, et al. Fecal microbiota transplant
improves cognition in hepatic encephalopathy and its eﬀect varies by
donor and recipient. Hepatol Commun 2022;6(8):2079–89.
192. Bajaj JS, Fagan A, Gavis EA, et al. Microbiota transplant for hepatic
encephalopathy in cirrhosis: The THEMATIC trial. J Hepatol 2025;
83(1):81–91.
193. Van der Rijt CC, Schalm SW, Schat H, et al. Overt hepatic
encephalopathy precipitated by zinc deﬁciency. Gastroenterology 1991;
100(4):1114–8.
194. Chavez-Tapia NC, Cesar-Arce A, Barrientos-Guti´errez T, et al. A
systematic review and meta-analysis of the use of oral zinc in the
treatment of hepatic encephalopathy. Nutr J 2013;12:74.
195. Shen YC, Chang YH, Fang CJ, et al. Zinc supplementation in patients
with cirrhosis and hepatic encephalopathy: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Nutr J 2019;18(1):34.
196. Tapper EB, Henderson JB, Parikh ND, et al. Incidence of and risk factors
for hepatic encephalopathy in a population‐based cohort of Americans
with cirrhosis. Hepatol Commun 2019;3(11):1510–9.
197. Acharya C, Betrapally NS, Gillevet PM, et al. Chronic opioid use is
associated with altered gut microbiota and predicts readmissions in
patients with cirrhosis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2017;45(2):319–31.
198. Moon AM, Jiang Y, Rogal SS, et al. Opioid prescriptions are
associated with hepatic encephalopathy in a national cohort of
patients with compensated cirrhosis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2020;
51(6):652–60.
199. Lee PC, Yang YY, Lin MW, et al. Benzodiazepine-associated hepatic
encephalopathy signiﬁcantly increased healthcare utilization and
medical costs of Chinese cirrhotic patients: 7-year experience. Dig Dis
Sci 2014;59(7):1603–16.
200. Nevo ON, Brinker AD, Diak IL, et al. Response to: Improvement of
sleep architecture parameters in cirrhotic patients with recurrent
hepatic encephalopathy with the use of rifaximin: Hepatic
encephalopathy in association with zolpidem. Eur J Gastroenterol
Hepatol 2017;29(9):1102–3.
201. Tapper EB, Zhao Z, Winder GS, et al. Deprescribing zolpidem reduces
falls and fractures in patients with cirrhosis. JHEP Rep 2022;4(6):100478.
202. Ma YJ, Cao ZX, Li Y, et al. Proton pump inhibitor use increases hepatic
encephalopathy risk: A systematic review and meta-analysis. World J
Gastroenterol 2019;25(21):2675–82.
203. Tsai CF, Chen MH, Wang YP, et al. Proton pump inhibitors increase risk
for hepatic encephalopathy in patients with cirrhosis in a population
study. Gastroenterology 2017;152(1):134–41.
204. Shi D, Zhou Z, Dai Y, et al. Proton pump inhibitor therapy and hepatic
encephalopathy risk in cirrhotic patients: A systematic review with
meta-analysis. Clin Drug Investig 2019;39(9):847–56.
205. Dam G, Vilstrup H, Watson H, et al. Proton pump inhibitors as a risk
factor for hepatic encephalopathy and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
in patients with cirrhosis with ascites. Hepatology 2016;64(4):1265–72.
206. Bajaj JS, Acharya C, Fagan A, et al. Proton pump inhibitor initiation and
withdrawal aﬀects gut microbiota and readmission risk in cirrhosis. Am
J Gastroenterol 2018;113(8):1177–86.
207. Williams S, Louissaint J, Nikirk S, et al. Deprescribing medications that
may increase the risk of hepatic encephalopathy: A qualitative study of
patients with cirrhosis and their doctors. United European
Gastroenterol J 2021;9(2):193–202.
208. Aravinthan AD, Barbas AS, Doyle AC, et al. Characteristics of liver
transplant candidates delisted following recompensation and predictors
of such delisting in alcohol-related liver disease: A case-control study.
Transpl Int 2017;30(11):1140–9.
209. Pose E, Torrents A, Reverter E, et al. A notable proportion of liver
transplant candidates with alcohol-related cirrhosis can be delisted
because of clinical improvement. J Hepatol 2021;75(2):275–83.
210. de Franchis R, Bosch J, Garcia-Tsao G, et al. Baveno VII: Renewing
consensus in portal hypertension. J Hepatol 2022;76(4):959–74.
211. Tapper EB, Essien UR, Zhao Z, et al. Racial and ethnic disparities in
rifaximin use and subspecialty referrals for patients with hepatic
encephalopathy in the United States. J Hepatol 2022;77(2):377–82.
212. Carbonneau M, Eboreime EA, Hyde A, et al. The cirrhosis care Alberta
(CCAB) protocol: Implementing an evidence-based best practice order
set for the management of liver cirrhosis: A hybrid type I eﬀectivenessimplementation trial. BMC Health Serv Res 2020;20(1):558.

VOLUME 121 | MARCH 2026 www.amjgastro.com

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

ACG Hepatic Encephalopathy Guideline

213. Shaw J, Acharya C, Fagan A, et al. Health information technology
interventions reduce avoidable readmissions in cirrhosis: The HEROIC
randomized controlled trial. Hepatology 2025.
214. Albillos A, Martin-Mateos R, Van der Merwe S, et al. Cirrhosisassociated immune dysfunction. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 2022;
19(2):112–34.
215. Ismond KP, Spiers JA, Tandon P. Identifying opportunities for hepatic
encephalopathy self-management: A mixed methods systematic review
and synthesis. Can Liver J 2023;6(2):215–33.
216. Goldsworthy MA, Fateen W, Thygesen H, et al. Patient understanding of
liver cirrhosis and improvement using multimedia education. Frontline
Gastroenterol 2017;8(3):214–9.
217. Beg S, Curtis S, Shariﬀ M. Patient education and its eﬀect on selfmanagement in cirrhosis: A pilot study. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol
2016;28(5):582–7.
218. Bloom PP, Che Z, Hyde A, et al. Development and evaluation of a patient
cirrhosis knowledge assessment. Dig Dis Sci 2024;69(2):399–409.
219. Volk ML, Fisher N, Fontana RJ. Patient knowledge about disease selfmanagement in cirrhosis. Am J Gastroenterol 2013;108(3):302–5.
220. Zhang X, Xi W, Liu L, et al. Improvement in quality of life and activities of
daily living in patients with liver cirrhosis with the use of health education
and patient health empowerment. Med Sci Monit 2019;25:4602–8.
221. Ismond KP, Loch-Ismond E, Tandon P, et al. An evaluation of online
cirrhosis-related information intended for patients and caregivers. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2023;21(3):835–7.e8.
222. Bloom PP, Marx M, Wang TJ, et al. Attitudes towards digital health tools
for outpatient cirrhosis management in patients with decompensated
cirrhosis. BMJ Innov 2020;6(1):18–25.
223. Montagnese S, Amato E, Schiﬀ S, et al. A patients’ and caregivers’
perspective on hepatic encephalopathy. Metab Brain Dis 2012;27(4):
567–72.
224. Tandon P, Walling A, Patton H, et al. AGA clinical practice update on
palliative care management in cirrhosis: Expert review. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021;19(4):646–56.e3.
225. Shetty A, Saab EG, Choi G. Social impact of hepatic encephalopathy.
Clin Liver Dis 2024;28(2):273–85.
226. Deng LX, Sharma A, Gedallovich SM, et al. Caregiver burden in adult
solid organ transplantation. Transplantation 2023;107(7):1482–91.
227. Higginson IJ, Gao W, Jackson D, et al. Short-form Zarit Caregiver
Burden Interviews were valid in advanced conditions. J Clin Epidemiol
2010;63(5):535–42.
228. B´edard M, Molloy DW, Squire L, et al. The Zarit Burden Interview: A
new short version and screening version. Gerontologist 2001;41(5):
652–7.
229. Whalen KJ, Buchholz SW. The reliability, validity and feasibility of tools
used to screen for caregiver burden: A systematic review. JBI Libr Syst
Rev 2009;7(32):1373–430.
230. Yanny B, Pham NV, Saleh H, et al. Approaches to assessing burden in
caregivers of patients with cirrhosis. J Clin Transl Hepatol 2020;8(2):
127–34.
231. Rakoski MO, McCammon RJ, Piette JD, et al. Burden of cirrhosis on
older Americans and their families: Analysis of the health and retirement
study. Hepatology 2012;55(1):184–91.
232. Johnson E, Hyde A, Drager D, et al. Collaborating with patients and
caregivers to create web-based educational resources for people aﬀected
by cirrhosis. PEC Innov 2023;3:100201.
233. Bajaj JS, Ellwood M, Ainger T, et al. Mindfulness-based stress reduction
therapy improves patient and caregiver-reported outcomes in cirrhosis.
Clin Transl Gastroenterol 2017;8(7):e108.
234. Tapper EB, Trivedi H, Simonetto DA, et al. The RELAX randomized
controlled trial: Stretching versus meditation for nocturnal muscle
cramps. Liver Int 2024;44(9):2434–41.
235. Tapper EB, Saleh ZM, Lizza S, et al. CAREGIVER randomized trial of
two mindfulness methods to improve the burden and distress of caring
for persons with cirrhosis. Dig Dis Sci 2023;68(9):3625–33.
236. Bajaj JS, Ahluwalia V, Thacker LR, et al. Brain training with video games
in covert hepatic encephalopathy. Am J Gastroenterol 2017;112(2):
316–24.
237. Tapper EB, Nikirk S, Evon DM, et al. LIVE-SMART: A sequential,
multiple assignment randomized trial to reduce falls in cirrhosis.
Hepatol Commun 2025;9(3):e0626.
238. Dajti E, Renzulli M, Colecchia A, et al. Size and location of spontaneous
portosystemic shunts predict the risk of decompensation in cirrhotic
patients. Dig Liver Dis 2022;54(1):103–10.

© 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology

239. Laleman W, Praktiknjo M, Lauridsen MM, et al. Closing spontaneous
portosystemic shunts in cirrhosis: Does it make sense? Does it work?
What does it take? Metab Brain Dis 2023;38(5):1717–28.
240. Saad WE, Lippert A, Saad NE, et al. Ectopic varices: Anatomical
classiﬁcation, hemodynamic classiﬁcation, and hemodynamic-based
management. Tech Vasc Interv Radiol 2013;16(2):158–75.
241. Vidal-Gonz´alez J, Quiroga S, Sim´on-Talero M, et al. Spontaneous
portosystemic shunts in liver cirrhosis: New approaches to an old
problem. Therap Adv Gastroenterol 2020;13:1756284820961287.
242. Philips CA, Kumar L, Augustine P. Shunt occlusion for portosystemic
shunt syndrome related refractory hepatic encephalopathy-A singlecenter experience in 21 patients from Kerala. Indian J Gastroenterol
2017;36(5):411–9.
243. Zhao L, Wu Q, Li Q, et al. TIPSS plus extrahepatic collateral
embolisation may decrease variceal rebleeding and post-TIPSS hepatic
encephalopathy. Gut 2024;73(7):1224–6.
244. Xia Y, Tie J, Wang G, et al. Small transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic
shunt plus variceal embolization for gastric varices: A multicenter cohort
study. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2025;23(6):965–77.e20.
245. Rathi S, Kalantri A, Shastri A, et al. Endoscopic ultrasound-guided
transgastric shunt obliteration for recurrent hepatic encephalopathy.
Am J Gastroenterol 2023;118(10):1895–8.
246. Nardelli S, Lattanzi B, Merli M, et al. Muscle alterations are associated
with minimal and overt hepatic encephalopathy in patients with liver
cirrhosis. Hepatology 2019;70(5):1704–13.
247. Ruiz-Marg´ain A, Macías-Rodríguez RU, Ampuero J, et al. Low phase
angle is associated with the development of hepatic encephalopathy
in patients with cirrhosis. World J Gastroenterol 2016;22(45):
10064–70.
248. Siramolpiwat S, Kiattikunrat K, Soontararatpong R, et al. Frailty as tested
by the Liver Frailty Index is associated with decompensation and
unplanned hospitalization in patients with compensated cirrhosis.
Scand J Gastroenterol 2021;56(10):1210–9.
249. Serper M, Tao SY, Kent DS, et al. Inpatient frailty assessment is feasible
and predicts nonhome discharge and mortality in decompensated
cirrhosis. Liver Transpl 2021;27(12):1711–22.
250. Ney M, Tangri N, Dobbs B, et al. Predicting hepatic encephalopathyrelated hospitalizations using a composite assessment of cognitive
impairment and frailty in 355 patients with cirrhosis. Am J
Gastroenterol 2018;113(10):1506–15.
251. Berry K, Ruck JM, Barry F, et al. Prevalence of cognitive impairment in
liver transplant recipients. Clin Transpl 2024;38(1):e15229.
252. Krogsgaard K, Gluud C, Henriksen JH, et al. Correlation between liver
morphology and portal pressure in alcoholic liver disease. Hepatology
1984;4:699–703.
253. Cui Y, Zhang M, Guo J, et al. Correlation between sarcopenia and
cirrhosis: A meta-analysis. Front Nutr 2023;10:1342100.
254. Lai JC, Rahimi RS, Verna EC, et al. Frailty associated with waitlist
mortality independent of ascites and hepatic encephalopathy in
a multicenter study. Gastroenterology 2019;156(6):1675–82.
255. Kamiliou A, Lekakis V, Chrysavgis L, et al. Prevalence and impact on the
outcome of myosteatosis in patients with cirrhosis: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Hepatol Int 2024;18(2):688–99.
256. Tarter RE, Panzak G, Switala J, et al. Isokinetic muscle strength and its
association with neuropsychological capacity in cirrhotic alcoholics.
Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1997;21(2):191–6.
257. Duarte-Rojo A, Bux R, Sliwa J. Untangling frailty, sarcopenia, and
physical ﬁtness in cirrhosis. Clin Liver Dis (Hoboken) 2024;23(1):e0213.
258. Cruz-Jentoft AJ, Bahat G, Bauer J, et al. Sarcopenia: Revised European
consensus on deﬁnition and diagnosis. Age Ageing 2019;48(4):601.
259. Ebadi M, Bhanji RA, Dunichand-Hoedl AR, et al. Sarcopenia severity
based on computed tomography image analysis in patients with
cirrhosis. Nutrients 2020;12(11):3463.
260. Tateyama M, Naoe H, Tanaka M, et al. Loss of skeletal muscle mass
aﬀects the incidence of minimal hepatic encephalopathy: A case control
study. BMC Gastroenterol 2020;20(1):371.
261. Wijarnpreecha K, Werlang M, Panjawatanan P, et al. Association
between sarcopenia and hepatic encephalopathy: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. Ann Hepatol 2020;19(3):245–50.
262. Merli M, Giusto M, Lucidi C, et al. Muscle depletion increases the risk of
overt and minimal hepatic encephalopathy: Results of a prospective
study. Metab Brain Dis 2013;28(2):281–4.
263. Augusti L, Franzoni LC, Santos LA, et al. Lower values of handgrip
strength and adductor pollicis muscle thickness are associated with
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

615

616

Bajaj et al

hepatic encephalopathy manifestations in cirrhotic patients. Metab
Brain Dis 2016;31(4):909–15.
264. Miwa T, Hanai T, Nishimura K, et al. Handgrip strength stratiﬁes the
risk of covert and overt hepatic encephalopathy in patients with
cirrhosis. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 2022;46(4):858–66.
265. San Martín-Valenzuela C, Borras-Barrachina A, Gallego JJ, et al. Motor
and cognitive performance in patients with liver cirrhosis with minimal
hepatic encephalopathy. J Clin Med 2020;9(7):2154.
266. Lai JC, Dodge JL, Kappus MR, et al. Changes in frailty are associated with
waitlist mortality in patients with cirrhosis. J Hepatol 2020;73(3):
575–81.
267. Lin FP, Visina JM, Bloomer PM, et al. Prehabilitation-driven changes in
frailty metrics predict mortality in patients with advanced liver disease.
Am J Gastroenterol 2021;116(10):2105–17.
268. Dunn MA, Josbeno DA, Schmotzer AR, et al. The gap between clinically
assessed physical performance and objective physical activity in liver
transplant candidates. Liver Transpl 2016;22(10):1324–32.
269. Moctezuma-Velazquez C, Ebadi M, Bhanji RA, et al. Limited
performance of subjective global assessment compared to computed
tomography-determined sarcopenia in predicting adverse clinical
outcomes in patients with cirrhosis. Clin Nutr 2019;38(6):2696–703.
270. C´ordoba J, L´opez-Hellín J, Planas M, et al. Normal protein diet for
episodic hepatic encephalopathy: Results of a randomized study.
J Hepatol 2004;41(1):38–43.
271. Swart GR, van den Berg JW, van Vuure JK, et al. Minimum protein
requirements in liver cirrhosis determined by nitrogen balance
measurements at three levels of protein intake. Clin Nutr 1989;8(6):
329–36.
272. Swart GR, van den Berg JW, Wattimena JL, et al. Elevated protein
requirements in cirrhosis of the liver investigated by whole body protein
turnover studies. Clin Sci (Lond) 1988;75(1):101–7.
273. Maharshi S, Sharma BC, Sachdeva S, et al. Eﬃcacy of nutritional therapy
for patients with cirrhosis and minimal hepatic encephalopathy in
a randomized trial. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2016;14(3):454–60.e3,
quiz e33.
274. Ahuja H, Sharma BC, Sachdeva S, et al. A double blind randomized
controlled trial to assess eﬃcacy of nutritional therapy for prevention of
recurrence of hepatic encephalopathy in patients with cirrhosis.
J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2023;38(3):433–40.
275. Sharma BC, Maharshi S, Sachdeva S, et al. Nutritional therapy for
persistent cognitive impairment after resolution of overt hepatic
encephalopathy in patients with cirrhosis: A double-blind randomized
controlled trial. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2023;38(11):1917–25.
276. Guo YJ, Tian ZB, Jiang N, et al. Eﬀects of late evening snack on cirrhotic
patients: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Gastroenterol Res Pract
2018;2018:9189062.
277. Plank LD, Gane EJ, Peng S, et al. Nocturnal nutritional supplementation
improves total body protein status of patients with liver cirrhosis: A
randomized 12-month trial. Hepatology 2008;48(2):557–66.
278. Chen CJ, Wang LC, Kuo HT, et al. Signiﬁcant eﬀects of late evening
snack on liver functions in patients with liver cirrhosis: A meta-analysis
of randomized controlled trials. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2019;34(7):
1143–52.
279. Leoni L, Valoriani F, Barbieri R, et al. Unlocking the power of lateevening snacks: Practical ready-to-prescribe chart menu for patients
with cirrhosis. Nutrients 2023;15:3471.
280. Hanai T, Nishimura K, Unome S, et al. Nutritional counseling improves
mortality and prevents hepatic encephalopathy in patients with alcoholassociated liver disease. Hepatol Res 2024;54(11):1089–98.
281. Reuter B, Shaw J, Hanson J, et al. Nutritional assessment in inpatients
with cirrhosis can be improved after training and is associated with lower
readmissions. Liver Transpl 2019;25(12):1790–9.
282. Meena BL, Taneja S, Tandon P, et al. Home-based intensive nutrition
therapy improves frailty and sarcopenia in patients with decompensated
cirrhosis: A randomized clinical trial. J Gastroenterol Hepatol 2023;
38(2):210–8.
283. Holeˇcek M. The role of skeletal muscle in the pathogenesis of altered
concentrations of branched-chain amino acids (valine, leucine, and
isoleucine) in liver cirrhosis, diabetes, and other diseases. Physiol Res
2021;70(3):293–305.
284. Swansson WD, Anderson BM, Yeoh SW, et al. Management of
minimal and overt hepatic encephalopathy with branched-chain
amino acids: A review of the evidence. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol
2023;35(8):812–21.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

285. Hey P, Hoermann R, Sinclair M, et al. Branched-chain amino acid
supplementation does not improve measures of sarcopenia in cirrhosis:
Results of a randomised controlled trial. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2024;
59(8):941–52.
286. Iqbal U, Jadeja RN, Khara HS, et al. A comprehensive review evaluating
the impact of protein source (vegetarian vs. meat based) in hepatic
encephalopathy. Nutrients 2021;13(2):370.
287. Uribe M, M´arquez MA, Garcia-Ramos G, et al. Treatment of chronic
portal--systemic encephalopathy with vegetable and animal protein
diets. A controlled crossover study. Dig Dis Sci 1982;27(12):1109–16.
288. Bianchi GP, Marchesini G, Fabbri A, et al. Vegetable versus animal
protein diet in cirrhotic patients with chronic encephalopathy. A
randomized cross-over comparison. J Intern Med 1993;233(5):385–92.
289. Jonung T, Jeppsson B, Aslund U, et al. A comparison between meat and
vegan protein diet in patients with mild chronic hepatic encephalopathy.
Clin Nutr 1987;6(3):169–74.
290. Badal BD, Fagan A, Tate V, et al. Substitution of one meat-based meal
with vegetarian and vegan alternatives generates lower ammonia and
alters metabolites in cirrhosis: A randomized clinical trial. Clin Transl
Gastroenterol 2024;15:e1.
291. Lattanzi B, Bruni A, Di Cola S, et al. The eﬀects of 12-week beta-hydroxybeta-methylbutyrate supplementation in patients with liver cirrhosis:
Results from a randomized controlled single-blind pilot study. Nutrients
2021;13(7):2296.
292. Espina S, Sanz-Paris A, Gonzalez-Irazabal Y, et al. Randomized clinical
trial: Eﬀects of beta-hydroxy-beta-methylbutyrate (HMB)-enriched vs.
HMB-free oral nutritional supplementation in malnourished cirrhotic
patients. Nutrients 2022;14(11):2344.
293. Goh ET, Stokes CS, Sidhu SS, et al. L-ornithine L-aspartate for
prevention and treatment of hepatic encephalopathy in people with
cirrhosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018;5:CD012410.
294. Rom´an E, Nieto JC, Gely C, et al. Eﬀect of a multistrain probiotic on
cognitive function and risk of falls in patients with cirrhosis: A
randomized trial. Hepatol Commun 2019;3(5):632–45.
295. Johnston HE, Takefala TG, Kelly JT, et al. The eﬀect of diet and exercise
interventions on body composition in liver cirrhosis: A systematic
review. Nutrients 2022;14(16):3365.
296. Kasia C, Duarte-Rojo A. Optimizing the liver transplant candidate. npj
Gut and Liver 2024;1:3.
297. Lin FP, Ferrando AA, Dennis RA, et al. Exercise-induced
hyperammonemia does not precipitate overt hepatic encephalopathy.
Hepatology 2020;72(2):778–80.
298. Jamali T, Raasikh T, Bustamante G, et al. Outcomes of exercise
interventions in patients with advanced liver disease: A systematic
review of randomized clinical trials. Am J Gastroenterol 2022;117(10):
1614–20.
299. Tapper EB, Martinez-Macias R, Duarte-Rojo A. Is exercise beneﬁcial
and safe in patients with cirrhosis and portal hypertension? Curr
Hepatol Rep 2018;17(3):175–83.
300. Duarte-Rojo A, Bloomer PM, Grubbs RK, et al. Use of a mobile-assisted
telehealth regimen to increase exercise in transplant candidates: A
home-based prehabilitation pilot and feasibility trial. Clin Transl
Gastroenterol 2023;14(11):e00601.
301. Macías-Rodríguez RU, Ilarraza-Lomelí H, Ruiz-Marg´ain A, et al.
Changes in hepatic venous pressure gradient induced by physical
exercise in cirrhosis: Results of a pilot randomized open clinical trial.
Clin Transl Gastroenterol 2016;7:e180.
302. Berzigotti A, Albillos A, Villanueva C, et al. Eﬀects of an intensive
lifestyle intervention program on portal hypertension in patients with
cirrhosis and obesity: The SportDiet study. Hepatology 2017;65(4):
1293–305.
303. Macías-Rodríguez RU, Ruiz-Marg´ain A, Rom´an-Calleja B, et al. Eﬀect of
a monitored exercise protocol in cerebral and hepatic hemodynamics in
patients with cirrhosis and portal hypertension. Dig Liver Dis 2024;
56(5):827–35.
304. Zenith L, Meena N, Ramadi A, et al. Eight weeks of exercise training
increases aerobic capacity and muscle mass and reduces fatigue in
patients with cirrhosis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2014;12(11):
1920–6.e2.
305. Aamann L, Tandon P, B´emeur C. Role of exercise in the management of
hepatic encephalopathy: Experience from animal and human studies.
J Clin Exp Hepatol 2019;9(1):131–6.
306. Sirisunhirun P, Bandidniyamanon W, Jrerattakon Y, et al. Eﬀect of a 12week home-based exercise training program on aerobic capacity, muscle

VOLUME 121 | MARCH 2026 www.amjgastro.com

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

ACG Hepatic Encephalopathy Guideline

mass, liver and spleen stiﬀness, and quality of life in cirrhotic patients: A
randomized controlled clinical trial. BMC Gastroenterol 2022;22(1):66.
307. Rom´an E, Torrades MT, Nadal MJ, et al. Randomized pilot study: Eﬀects
of an exercise programme and leucine supplementation in patients with
cirrhosis. Dig Dis Sci 2014;59(8):1966–75.
308. Aamann L, Dam G, Borre M, et al. Resistance training increases muscle
strength and muscle size in patients with liver cirrhosis. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2020;18(5):1179–87.e6.
309. Wallen MP, Woodward AJ, Hall A, et al. Poor cardiorespiratory ﬁtness is
a risk factor for sepsis in patients awaiting liver transplantation.
Transplantation 2019;103(3):529–35.
310. Sinclair M, Grossmann M, Hoermann R, et al. Testosterone therapy
increases muscle mass in men with cirrhosis and low testosterone: A
randomised controlled trial. J Hepatol 2016;65(5):906–13.
311. Bruno BJ, Weavil JC, Ogle J, et al. Oral LPCN 1148 improves sarcopenia
and hepatic encephalopathy in male patients with cirrhosis: A
randomized, placebo-controlled phase 2 trial. Hepatology 2025;81(6):
1764–75.
312. Bajaj JS, Salzman N, Acharya C, et al. Microbial functional change is
linked with clinical outcomes after capsular fecal transplant in cirrhosis.
JCI Insight 2019;4(24):e133410.
313. Bloom PP, Bassis CM, Crossette E, et al. Safety and eﬃcacy of a deﬁned
bacterial consortium, VE303, to treat HE. Hepatol Commun 2025;9(3):
e0650.
314. Dhiman RK, Rana B, Agrawal S, et al. Probiotic VSL#3 reduces liver
disease severity and hospitalization in patients with cirrhosis: A
randomized, controlled trial. Gastroenterology 2014;147(6):1327–37.e3.
315. Bajaj JS, Saeian K, Christensen KM, et al. Probiotic yogurt for the
treatment of minimal hepatic encephalopathy. Am J Gastroenterol 2008;
103(7):1707–15.
316. Sharma K, Pant S, Misra S, et al. Eﬀect of rifaximin, probiotics, and
l-ornithine l-aspartate on minimal hepatic encephalopathy: A
randomized controlled trial. Saudi J Gastroenterol 2014;20(4):225–32.
317. Bajaj JS, Heuman DM, Hylemon PB, et al. Randomised clinical trial:
Lactobacillus GG modulates gut microbiome, metabolome and
endotoxemia in patients with cirrhosis. Aliment Pharmacol Ther 2014;
39(10):1113–25.
318. Rahimi RS, Safadi R, Thabut D, et al. Eﬃcacy and safety of ornithine
phenylacetate for treating overt hepatic encephalopathy in a randomized
trial. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021;19(12):2626–35.e7.
319. Caraceni P, Riggio O, Angeli P, et al. Long-term albumin administration
in decompensated cirrhosis (ANSWER): An open-label randomised
trial. Lancet 2018;391(10138):2417–29.
320. Di Pascoli M, Fasolato S, Piano S, et al. Long-term administration of
human albumin improves survival in patients with cirrhosis and
refractory ascites. Liver Int 2019;39(1):98–105.
321. Ventura-Cots M, Sim´on-Talero M, Poca M, et al. Eﬀects of albumin on
survival after a hepatic encephalopathy episode: Randomized doubleblind trial and meta-analysis. J Clin Med 2021;10(21):4885.
322. Fagan A, Gavis EA, Gallagher ML, et al. A double-blind randomized
placebo-controlled trial of albumin in outpatients with hepatic
encephalopathy: HEAL study. J Hepatol 2023;78(2):312–21.
323. Montagnese S, Lauridsen M, Vilstrup H, et al. A pilot study of
golexanolone, a new GABA-A receptor-modulating steroid antagonist,
in patients with covert hepatic encephalopathy. J Hepatol 2021;75(1):
98–107.
324. Schindler P, Heinzow H, Trebicka J, et al. Shunt-induced hepatic
encephalopathy in TIPS: Current approaches and clinical challenges.
J Clin Med 2020;9(11):3784.
325. Boike JR, Thornburg BG, Asrani SK, et al. North American practicebased recommendations for transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic
shunts in portal hypertension. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2022;20(8):
1636–62.e36.
326. Maleux G, Heye S, Verslype C, et al. Management of transjugular
intrahepatic portosystemic shunt induced refractory hepatic
encephalopathy with the parallel technique: Results of a clinical followup study. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2007;18(8):986–92, quiz 993.
327. Pereira K, Carrion AF, Martin P, et al. Current diagnosis and
management of post-transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt
refractory hepatic encephalopathy. Liver Int 2015;35(12):2487–94.
328. Tiede A, Stockhoﬀ L, Ehrenbauer AF, et al. Value of systemic
inﬂammation markers for the detection of minimal and prediction of
overt hepatic encephalopathy after TIPS insertion. Metab Brain Dis
2024;40(1):58.

© 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology

329. Friis KH, Thomsen KL, Laleman W, et al. Post-transjugular intrahepatic
portosystemic shunt (TIPS) hepatic encephalopathy: A review of the
past decade’s literature focusing on incidence, risk factors, and
prophylaxis. J Clin Med 2023;13(1):14.
330. Ahmed Z, Badal J, Gangwani MK, et al. Sarcopenia is a risk factor for
post-transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt hepatic
encephalopathy and mortality: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Indian J Gastroenterol 2024;43(4):748–59.
331. Li Y, Guo Y, Wang X, et al. Association between sarcopenia and hepatic
encephalopathy after transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt in
patients with cirrhosis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Abdom
Radiol (NY) 2024;49(2):575–85.
332. Gazda J, Di Cola S, Lapenna L, et al. The impact of transjugular
intrahepatic portosystemic shunt on nutrition in liver cirrhosis patients:
A systematic review. Nutrients 2023;15(7):1617.
333. Tsien C, Shah SN, McCullough AJ, et al. Reversal of sarcopenia predicts
survival after a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent. Eur J
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2013;25(1):85–93.
334. Cai W, Lin H, Qi R, et al. Psoas muscle density predicts occurrences of hepatic
encephalopathy in patients receiving transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic
shunts within 1 year. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol 2022;45:93–101.
335. Liu J, Ma J, Yang C, et al. Sarcopenia in patients with cirrhosis after
transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt placement. Radiology
2022;303(3):711–9.
336. Liu J, Yang C, Yao J, et al. Improvement of sarcopenia is beneﬁcial for
prognosis in cirrhotic patients after TIPS placement. Dig Liver Dis 2023;
55(7):918–25.
337. Wang C, Teng Y, Gao J, et al. Low adipose tissue index as an indicator of
hepatic encephalopathy in cirrhotic patients following transjugular
intrahepatic portosystemic shunt. Abdom Radiol (NY) 2023;48(4):
1454–67.
338. Gioia S, Ridola L, Cristofaro L, et al. The improvement in body
composition including subcutaneous and visceral fat reduces ammonia
and hepatic encephalopathy after transjugular intrahepatic
portosystemic shunt. Liver Int 2021;41(12):2965–73.
339. Liang A, Brar S, Almaghrabi M, et al. Primary prevention of hepatic
encephalopathy post-TIPS: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Medicine (Baltimore) 2023;102(38):e35266.
340. Lv Y, Chen H, Luo B, et al. Concurrent large spontaneous portosystemic
shunt embolization for the prevention of overt hepatic encephalopathy
after TIPS: A randomized controlled trial. Hepatology 2022;76(3):
676–88.
341. Bureau C, Thabut D, Jezequel C, et al. The use of rifaximin in the
prevention of overt hepatic encephalopathy after transjugular
intrahepatic portosystemic shunt: A randomized controlled trial. Ann
Intern Med 2021;174(5):633–40.
342. Bajaj JS, Saeian K. MELD score does not discriminate against patients
with hepatic encephalopathy. Dig Dis Sci 2005;50(4):753–6.
343. Wong RJ, Gish RG, Ahmed A. Hepatic encephalopathy is associated
with signiﬁcantly increased mortality among patients awaiting liver
transplantation. Liver Transpl 2014;20(12):1454–61.
344. Bajaj JS, O’Leary JG, Tandon P, et al. Hepatic encephalopathy is
associated with mortality in patients with cirrhosis independent of other
extrahepatic organ failures. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol 2017;15(4):
565–74.e4.
345. Gadiparthi C, Cholankeril G, Yoo ER, et al. Waitlist outcomes in liver
transplant candidates with high MELD and severe hepatic
encephalopathy. Dig Dis Sci 2018;63(6):1647–53.
346. Lucidi C, Ginanni Corradini S, Abraldes JG, et al. Hepatic
encephalopathy expands the predictivity of model for end-stage liver
disease in liver transplant setting: Evidence by means of 2 independent
cohorts. Liver Transpl 2016;22(10):1333–42.
347. Silvey S, Patel N, O’Leary JG, et al. Enhancement of cirrhosis mortality
prediction by including hepatic encephalopathy to Meld3.0 in a national
veteran cohort. Am J Gastroenterol 2025;120(7):1649–52.
348. Weiss N, Thabut D. Neurological complications occurring after liver
transplantation: Role of risk factors, hepatic encephalopathy, and acute
(on chronic) brain injury. Liver Transpl 2019;25(3):469–87.
349. Ahluwalia V, Wade JB, White MB, et al. Liver transplantation
signiﬁcantly improves global functioning and cerebral processing. Liver
Transpl 2016;22(10):1379–90.
350. Bajaj JS, Schubert CM, Heuman DM, et al. Persistence of cognitive
impairment after resolution of overt hepatic encephalopathy.
Gastroenterology 2010;138(7):2332–40.
The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

617

618

Bajaj et al

351. Nardelli S, Allampati S, Riggio O, et al. Hepatic encephalopathy is
associated with persistent learning impairments despite adequate
medical treatment: A multicenter, international study. Dig Dis Sci 2017;
62(3):794–800.
352. Riggio O, Ridola L, Pasquale C, et al. Evidence of persistent cognitive
impairment after resolution of overt hepatic encephalopathy. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2011;9(2):181–3.
353. Wong RJ, Aguilar M, Gish RG, et al. The impact of pretransplant hepatic
encephalopathy on survival following liver transplantation. Liver
Transpl 2015;21(7):873–80.
354. Campagna F, Montagnese S, Schiﬀ S, et al. Cognitive impairment and
electroencephalographic alterations before and after liver
transplantation: What is reversible? Liver Transpl 2014;20(8):977–86.
355. Sotil EU, Gottstein J, Ayala E, et al. Impact of preoperative overt hepatic
encephalopathy on neurocognitive function after liver transplantation.
Liver Transpl 2009;15(2):184–92.

The American Journal of GASTROENTEROLOGY

356. Garcia-Martinez R, Rovira A, Alonso J, et al. Hepatic encephalopathy is
associated with posttransplant cognitive function and brain volume.
Liver Transpl 2011;17(1):38–46.
357. Acharya C, Wade JB, Fagan A, et al. Overt hepatic encephalopathy
impairs learning on the EncephalApp stroop which is reversible after
liver transplantation. Liver Transpl 2017;23(11):1396–403.
358. Silvey S, Patel N, Davis BC, et al. Use of natural language processing to
objectively identify hepatic encephalopathy in multiple cohorts. Am J
Gastroenterol 2025.
359. Berg CL, Merion RM, Shearon TH, et al. Liver transplant recipient
survival beneﬁt with living donation in the model for endstage liver
disease allocation era. Hepatology 2011;54(4):1313–21.
360. Bausch Health Companies Inc. Bausch Health provides update on RED-C
phase 3 clinical trials. Bausch Health Companies Inc Investor Relations.
Published January 23, 2026. Accessed January 26, 2026. https://ir.
bauschhealth.com/news-releases/2026/01-23-2026-124516159

VOLUME 121 | MARCH 2026 www.amjgastro.com

Copyright © 2026 by The American College of Gastroenterology. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

