AF
T

KDIGO 2026 CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE FOR ACUTE KIDNEY
INJURY (AKI)AND ACUTE KIDNEY DISEASE (AKD)
PUBLIC REVIEW DRAFT
MARCH 2026

D

R

This is a draft document shared for public review and feedback
only. The content of this draft will change based on the feedback
received and should not be used for any other purpose beyond its
original intent.

i

TABLE OF CONTENTS

D

R

AF
T

Tables, figures, and supplementary materials…………………………………………………………………..
Abbreviations and acronyms………………………………………………………….……………...................
Notice…………………………………………………………………………………..…………………….....
Work Group membership ………………..……………………………………….....……………………….....
Abstract……………………………………….……………………………………..…………………...……..
Summary of recommendation statements and practice points.....………………………………………………
Chapter 1. AKI and AKD definition, identification, and classification……...……………………….………...
Chapter 2. AKI prediction, risk stratification, and diagnostic evaluation………………………………………
Chapter 3. Prevention and treatment of AKI………………………………….………………………………...
Chapter 4. Durg- and nephrotoxin-associated AKI……………………………………………………………..
Chapter 5. Renal replacement therapy………………………………………………………………………….
Chapter 6. Follow-up care after AKI or AKD…………………………………………………………………..
Methods for guideline development…………...………………………………....………………….……….....
References……………………………………………………………………………………………................

ii

ii
x
xii
xiii
xiv
1
35
66
118
194
246
319
354
378

TABLES

D

R

AF
T

Table 1. Criteria for acute kidney injury for children and adults
Table 2. Limitations of serum creatinine and urine output for the diagnosis of AKI
Table 3. Select kidney biomarkers and reported clinical applications
Table 4. Description and characteristics of select AKI biomarkers as of November 2025
Table 5. Specific situations where serum cystatin C measurement may be preferable to SCr to detect reduced
GFR
Table 6. Severity staging system for AKI
Table 7. Definitions of transient and persistent AKI
Table 8. Causes of AKI requiring specific treatments to protect the kidney
Table 9. Criteria for AKD
Table 10. Criteria for resolution of AKI and AKD
Table 11. Baseline creatinine estimation methods in children
Table 12. Criteria for AKI in neonates
Table 13. AKI staging criteria in neonates
Table 14. Common exposures and susceptibilities for community- and hospital-acquired AKI
Table 15. International Society of Nephrology 0by25 study–Clinical risk score for community-acquired acute
kidney injury
Table 16. Select clinical methods to measure kidney functional reserve
Table 17. Select studies identifying albuminuria as a risk factor for AKI
Table 18. Urine sediment and associated kidney injury syndromes
Table 19. Components of kidney health assessment for risk stratification in high-risk children during acute
illness
Table 20. Renal angina index scoring
Table 21. Vasopressors for management of adults with or at risk of AKI
Table 22. Escalation pathway for diuretic therapy in AKI-related volume overload in adults
Table 23. Standardized vasoactive therapy in hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI
Table 24. Tropical infections causing AKI
Table 25. Common plant and chemical toxins causing AKI
Table 26. List of drug/drug classes associated with pseudo-AKI and their possible mechanisms
Table 27. Examples of mechanisms and nephrotoxins that cause damage without dysfunction
Table 28. Multimodal approach to drug and nephrotoxin stewardship
Table 29. Therapeutic drug monitoring for drugs that are potentially nephrotoxic or excreted by the kidney
Table 30. Examples of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic drug-drug interactions associated with risk of
kidney damage or dysfunction
Table 31. Drug-induced crystalline nephropathies
Table 32. Description of pharmacist interventions and related outcomes for people with or at risk for AKI in
various practice settings across the world
Table 33. Potential use of biomarkers to distinguish etiology of drug-related acute kidney diseases
Table 34. Drug-, patient-, and RRT-related factors to consider when determining drug doses for people
receiving CRRT
Table 35. Examples of nephrotoxicity associated with natural products
Table 36. Predictive variables in included prediction models
Table 37. Risk factors for CA-AKI in adults
iii

35
36
38
39
47
50
52
54
55
57
61
62
64
67
75
83
93
105
114
115
138
152
165
180
183
196
197
201
203
204
206
209
212
214
216
219
222

D

R

AF
T

Table 38. Examples of strategies to estimate contrast volume doses with lower risk of CA-AKI
Table 39. Hydration strategies to prevent CA-AKI
Table 40. Sick day medication guidance for adults
Table 41. Summary of indications for starting RRT in adults with AKI when implementing a deferred RRT
initiation strategy
Table 42. Summary of each RRT modality along with their commonly applied settings, advantages, and
disadvantages
Table 43. Summary of parameters for RRT modalities in adults
Table 44. Summary of strategies and interventions to mitigate intradialytic hypotension among adults starting
or transitioning to IRRT
Table 45. Summary of varying CRRT dose-intensity stratified by BMI and body weight calculation
Table 46. Summary of calculation of CRRT dose-intensity across CRRT modes
Table 47. Peres’ formulas for determining catheter length in adults
Table 48. Common pediatric dialysis catheter sizes based on child weight
Table 49. Summary of the elements in the standard care bundle for non-cuffed dialysis catheters
Table 50. Summary of the pharmacokinetics profiles of anticoagulants used to maintain circuit patency in
CRRT
Table 51. Summary of hemofilter membrane materials
Table 52. Nonpharmacological interventions investigated in RCTs to prevent clotting during CRRT
Table 53. Summary of a representative sample of current commercially available dialysate and replacement
CRRT solutions
Table 54. Strategies to mitigate adverse events associated with ultrafiltration
Table 55. Key quality/performance measures of CRRT
Table 56. Summary of parameters for RRT modalities in critically ill children
Table 57. Monitoring for adverse outcomes after AKI and/or AKD requiring follow-up care
Table 58. Post AKI/AKD kidney health care framework
Table 59. AKI receiving RRT follow-up multidisciplinary monitoring tasks
Table 60. Post-discharge care guide for AKI-RRT patients incorporating WATCH-ME framework
Table 61. Pediatric AKI/AKD follow-up elements stratified by age group and risk category, modified from the
NICU Survivor Delphi process
Table 62. Sample risk assessment approach for pediatric AKI/AKD survivors, modified from the NICU
Survivor Delphi process
Table 63. Clinical questions and systematic review topics in PICOS format
Table 64. GRADE system for grading the certainty of evidence
Table 65. Classification for certainty of evidence
Table 66. KDIGO nomenclature and description for grading recommendations
Table 67. Determinants of the strength of recommendation

225
227
243
249
254
258
262
264
268
274
274
275
284
290
292
298
300
306
313
321
329
341
343
348
351
356
373
373
374
375

FIGURES
Figure 1. Hierarchical approach to the selection of the baseline SCr value used to characterize an AKI event in
adults
Figure 2. AKD, AKI, and kidney disease outcomes
Figure 3. Hierarchical approach to the selection of the baseline SCr value used to characterize an AKI event in
children
iv

49
55
60

D

R

AF
T

Figure 4. AKI exposures and susceptibilities
Figure 5. Conceptual framework for AKI risk stratification
Figure 6. Pre- and post-implementation pathways for the development, validation, implementation,
maintenance, and on-going evaluation of a clinical risk model
Figure 7. Application of the furosemide stress test in the setting of early mild-to-moderate AKI in adults
Figure 8. Associations of CKD staging by eGFRcr and UACR categories and risks for AKI in multivariableadjusted analyses
Figure 9. Multicomponent kidney protection strategy for prevention and management of AKI
Figure 10. Principles of remote ischemic preconditioning
Figure 11. Classifying drugs that potentially cause AKI
Figure 12. Approach to risk assessment for CA-AKI with diagnostic or interventional contrast imaging
procedures
Figure 13. Prediction of risks of AKI as a function of contrast volume and preprocedural AKI risk in
percutaneous coronary intervention
Figure 14. Schematic diagram of RRT continuum
Figure 15. Proposed algorithm for initiation RRT in critically ill patients with AKI.
Figure 16. Suggested algorithm for use of acute PD among adult patients with AKI
Figure 17. Anticoagulation strategy in a patient with AKI requiring RRT (CRRT/SLED/IHD)
Figure 18. Configuration of in-line hemofilter integration into ECLS circuit
Figure 19. Options of combining ECMO and CRRT circuits
Figure 20. Strategies to deliver holistic follow-up care with children and adults after AKI/AKD
Figure 21. 6-variable risk score to predict transition to severe CKD (G4 or G5) for adults after hospitalization
with AKI
Figure 22. Proposed conceptual model for the continuum of AKD, CKD, and AKI
Figure 23. Search yield and study flow diagram

v

66
68
78
87
92
145
160
195
223
224
246
253
272
282
308
309
326
333
338
369

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

D

R

AF
T

Appendix A. Search strategies
Table S1. Search strategies for systematic review topics
Appendix B. Concurrence with Institute of Medicine (IOM) standards for guideline development
Table S2. Guideline development checklist—IOM standards for development of trustworthy clinical
practice guidelines
Table S3. Adapted systematic review reporting standards checklist
Table S4. AGREE checklist
Appendix C. Data supplement—Evidence profiles cited in the guideline text
Table S5. Serum cystatin C in adults
Table S6. Serum cystatin C in children
Table S7. Comparison of different methods to estimate baseline serum creatinine on prioritized
outcomes in adults
Table S8. Comparison of different methods to estimate baseline serum creatinine on prioritized
outcomes in children
Table S9. AKI definitions and serum creatinine and urine output criteria: Marker criteria in adults
Table S10. AKI definitions and serum creatinine and urine output criteria: Marker criteria in children
Table S11. Comparison of different AKI definitions (criteria) on prioritized outcomes in adults
Table S12. Comparison of different AKI definitions (criteria) on prioritized outcomes in children
Table S13. AKI trajectories: Summary of trajectories addressed by eligible studies
Table S14. AKI trajectories: Comparison of difference AKI definitions on prioritized outcomes
Table S15. Outcomes in children and adults with AKD
Table S16. Prediction models in adults (all models analyzed together)
Table S17. Mehta score in adults undergoing cardiac surgery
Table S18. SPARK score in adults undergoing noncardiac surgery
Table S19. Prediction models in children (all models analyzed together)
Table S20. Alerts vs. no alerts in adults at risk of AKI
Table S21. Furosemide stress test in adults who are critically ill or undergoing surgery
Table S22. Furosemide stress test in children in the ICU or undergoing surgery
Table S23. Kinetic eGFR in adult medical or surgical patients
Table S24. Kinetic eGFR with KDIGO urine output criteria in adults who are critically ill in the ICU
with sepsis
Table S25. Kinetic eGFR with different calculations based on serum creatinine timing in children
Table S26. Urinary TIMP-2*IGFBP7 guided bundles vs. control in adults undergoing surgery
Table S27. Urinary TIMP-2*IGFBP7 in adults
Table S28. Urinary TIMP-2*IGFBP7 in children
Table S29. Urinary NGAL in adults

vi

1
24
25
26
32
33
34
36
38
44
45
57
60
61
70
76
77
78
79
80
82
83
84
85
86
88
89
91
92

Table S30. Urinary NGAL in children
Table S31. Urinary KIM-1 in adults
Table S32. Urinary KIM-1 in children
Table S33. Urinary L-FABP in adults
Table S34. Urinary L-FABP in children
Table S35. Urinary microscopy score in adults admitted to the surgical ICU after noncardiac surgery
Table S36. Muddy brown granular casts in adults with Stage ≥2 AKI
Table S37. Urine eosinophils in adults with both a urine eosinophils test and biopsy of native kidney
performed as part of their work-up for AKI
Table S38. Renal angina index in children in the ICU with sepsis
Table S39. Balanced crystalloid vs. high molecular weight hydroxyethyl starch in critically ill adults
Table S40. Balanced crystalloid vs. low molecular weight hydroxyethyl starch in critically ill adults
Table S41. Crystalloids vs. albumin in critically ill adults
Table S42. Gelatin vs. albumin/crystalloids in children with hypovolemia
Table S43. Buffered crystalloids vs. normal saline in critically ill adults
Table S44. Buffered crystalloids vs. normal saline in critically ill children in the ICU with severe
dehydration, sepsis, or septic shock
Table S45. Intravenous bicarbonate vs. usual care in critically ill adults with acidosis
Table S46. Restricted vs. liberal fluid therapy in abdominal surgery in adults
Table S47. High vs low MAP targets in critically ill adults with chronic hypertension
Table S48. High vs low MAP targets in adults with chronic hypertension undergoing cardiac surgery
Table S49. High vs low MAP targets in adults with chronic hypertension undergoing noncardiac
surgery
Table S50. Individualized vs. standard MAP targets in adults with chronic hypertension undergoing
noncardiac surgery
Table S51. Multicomponent kidney protection strategies vs. usual care in adults who are critically ill
or undergoing cardiovascular surgery
Table S52. Furosemide vs. RRT in adults who are critically ill or undergoing cardiovascular surgery
Table S53. Prophylactic intravenous amino acids during cardiac surgery in adults
Table S54. Remote ischemic preconditioning with no propofol anesthesia in adults undergoing cardiac
surgery
Table S55. Remote ischemic preconditioning with no propofol anesthesia in children undergoing
cardiac surgery
Table S56. Terlipressin vs. placebo for hepatorenal syndrome in adults
Table S57. Norepinephrine vs. placebo for hepatorenal syndrome in adults
Table S58. Midodrine + octreotide vs. placebo for hepatorenal syndrome in adults
Table S59. Norepinephrine vs. terlipressin for hepatorenal syndrome in adults
Table S60. Midodrine + octreotide vs. terlipressin for hepatorenal syndrome in adults
Table S61. Midodrine + octreotide vs. norepinephrine for hepatorenal syndrome in adults
Table S62. Rasburicase (urate oxidase) vs. allopurinol in tumor lysis syndrome in children
Table S63. Theophylline vs. control in neonates with perinatal asphyxia
Table S64. Nitric oxide vs. placebo in children undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass
Table S65. Vancomycin infusion: continuous vs. intermittent infusion in adults
Table S66. Vancomycin dosing: AUC vs. trough dosing in adults
Table S67. Clinical decision support systems/therapeutic drug monitoring for vancomycin in adults
Table S68. Pharmacist intervention for vancomycin monitoring in adults
Table S69. Antibiotic monitoring, not specific to vancomycin, in adults
Table S70. Conventional vs. prolonged infusion of meropenem in neonates
Table S71. Pharmacist intervention for all drugs in adults at risk for AKI
Table S72. Prophylactic hydration vs no hydration for contrast-induced nephropathy in adults
Table S73. Oral hydration vs no hydration for contrast-induced nephropathy in adults
2B

3B

4B

5B

6B

7B

8B

93
94
95
96
97
98
99

9B

10B

11B

12B

0B

13B

14B

D

R

15B

AF
T

1B

vii

100
101
103
104
105
106
107
109
111
113
115
116
117
118
119
121
122
123
125
126
128
129
130
131
132
133
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145

D

R

AF
T

Table S74. Intravenous hypotonic (0.45%) saline vs no hydration for contrast-induced nephropathy in
adults
Table S75. Intravenous isotonic (0.9%) saline versus hypotonic (0.45%) saline for contrast-induced
nephropathy in adults
Table S76. Intravenous sodium bicarbonate versus hypotonic (0.45%) saline for contrast-induced
nephropathy in adults
Table S77. Sodium bicarbonate vs. sodium chloride for prevention of contrast-induced AKI in adults
Table S78. RASi discontinuation or hold in adults undergoing cardiac procedures with intravascular
contrast
Table S79. RASi discontinuation for noncardiac surgery in adults
Table S80. RASi discontinuation for cardiac surgery in adults
Table S81. Discontinuation of multiple drugs for acute illness in adults
Table S82. RASi discontinuation with COVID-19 in adults
Table S83. Early vs. standard RRT in adults
Table S84. Very late vs. standard RRT in adults
Table S85. Continuous vs. intermittent renal replacement therapy in adults
Table S86. Intermittent renal replacement therapy vs. peritoneal dialysis in adults
Table S87. Continuous renal replacement therapy vs. peritoneal dialysis in adults
Table S88. Intensive high-volume hemofiltration continuous renal replacement therapy (various
thresholds) vs. less intensive continuous renal replacement therapy in adults
Table S89. Systemic unfractionated heparin vs. regional citrate anticoagulation in adults
Table S90. Regional unfractionated heparin (plus protamine) vs. regional citrate anticoagulation in
adults
Table S91. Regional citrate anticoagulation vs. low molecular weight heparin in adults
Table S92. Regional citrate anticoagulation vs. regional unfractionated heparin in children
Table S93. Comprehensive care vs. usual care in adults post-AKI
Table S94. Nephrologist follow-up vs. no nephrologist follow-up in post-AKI care in adults
Table S95. Risk-based care vs. usual care in adults post-AKI
Table S96. Restart of RASi vs. no RASi in adults post-AKI
Table S97. Post-AKI use of RASi (new start) vs. no RASi in adults
Appendix D. Data supplement— Evidence profiles not cited in the guideline text
Table S98. Clinical decision support systems (alerts) in adults
Table S99. Kinetic eGFR difference in adults with AKI
Table S100. Serum NGAL in adults
Table S101. Serum NGAL in children
Table S102. Ultrasound (power Doppler) in adults who are critically ill or have postoperative
conditions
Table S103. Ultrasound (renal resistive index) in adults who are critically ill or have postoperative
conditions
Table S104. Ultrasound (renal pulsatility index) in children in the ICU
Table S105. Ultrasound (renal resistive index) in children in the ICU
Table S106. RAI and NGAL clinical decision pathway vs. control in children in the pediatric ICU
Table S107. Gelatin vs. albumin/crystalloids in adults who are critically ill or undergoing surgery
Table S108. Albumin vs. alternatives in adults with cirrhosis
Table S109. Aggressive intravenous fluid resuscitation vs. nonaggressive fluid resuscitation adults
with pancreatitis
Table S110. Restrictive intravenous fluid resuscitation vs. standard fluid resuscitation in adults with
traumatic hemorrhagic shock
Table S111. Restrictive fluid resuscitation vs. standard fluid resuscitation in adults with sepsis
Table S112. Oral vs. intravenous rehydration in adults
Table S113. Goal-directed therapy vs. usual care in adults
viii

146
147
148
149
152
154
156
157
158
160
161
162
163
164
165
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
176
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193

D

R

AF
T

Table S114. Vasopressin receptor agonists vs. norepinephrine in adults
Table S115. Terlipressin vs. terlipressin + norepinephrine for hepatorenal syndrome in adults
Table S116. Intravenous bicarbonate vs. usual care in adults who are critically ill with acidosis
Table S117. Corticosteroids vs. control in hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low platelets
(HELLP) syndrome in pregnant women
Table S118. Haptoglobin vs. control in adults with hemolysis
Table S119. Continuous renal replacement therapy vs. conventional therapy in adults with
rhabdomyolysis
Table S120. Febuxostat vs. allopurinol therapy in adults with tumor lysis syndrome
Table S121. Bartholomew score in adults undergoing coronary angiography or angioplasty
Table S122. Brown score in adults undergoing coronary angiography or angioplasty
Table S123. Ghani score in adults undergoing coronary angiography or angioplasty
Table S124. Marenzi score in adults undergoing coronary angiography or angioplasty
Table S125. Mehran score in adults undergoing coronary angiography or angioplasty
Table S126. Tsai score in adults undergoing coronary angiography or angioplasty
Table S127. Tziakas score in adults undergoing coronary angiography or angioplasty
Table S128. Predication models, overall, in adults undergoing coronary angiography or angioplasty
Table S129. Prophylactic intravenous isotonic 0.9% saline vs. oral hydration with intravascular
contrast in adults
Table S130. Continuous renal replacement therapy vs. sustained low efficiency dialysis (SLED) in
adults
Table S131. Peritoneal dialysis vs. sustained low efficiency dialysis (SLED) in adults
Table S132. Intermittent hemodialysis vs. sustained low efficiency dialysis (SLED) in adults
Table S133. Newcastle Infant Dialysis Ultrafiltration System vs. traditional RRT in children in the
ICU
Table S134. Intensified vs. standard extended dialysis in adults
Table S135. High-volume vs. conventional volume hemofiltration in children with sepsis
Table S136. Intensive vs. minimal standard dosing of peritoneal dialysis in adults
Table S137. Nafamostat vs. no anticoagulation in adults
Table S138. Regional citrate anticoagulation vs no anticoagulation in adults
Table S139. Systemic unfractionated heparin vs. low molecular weight heparin in adults
Table S140. Systemic unfractionated heparin vs. prostaglandin I2 in adults
Table S141. Systemic unfractionated heparin vs. no anticoagulation in adults
Table S142. NSAIDs vs. no NSAIDs in adults post-AKI
Table S143. RASi (combined restart, new start, or any use) vs. control in adults post-AKI
Table S144. Any RASi (any use) vs. control in adults post-AKI

ix

194
195
196
198
199
200
201
202
203
204
205
206
207
208
209
210
211
212
213
214
215
216
217
218
219
220
221
222
223
224
226

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AF
T

American Association of Medical Instrumentation
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor
Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative
acute interstitial nephritis
acute kidney disease
acute kidney injury
Acute Kidney Injury Network
angiotensin II receptor blocker
acute tubular injury
acute tubular necrosis
area under the receiver operating characteristic curve
area under the curve
body mass index
blood pressure
contrast-associated acute kidney injury
clinical decision support system
confidence interval
chronic kidney disease
continuous renal replacement therapy
continuous venovenous hemodialysis
continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration
extracorporeal life support
estimated glomerular filtration rate
electronic health record
Evidence Review Team
Food and Drug Administration
glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist
Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation
glomerular filtration rate
hemodialysis
hazard ratio
health-related quality of life
high-volume hemofiltration
intensive care unit
intermittent hemodialysis
intermittent renal replacement therapy
International Society of Peritoneal Dialysis
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
kinetic glomerular filtration rate
kidney transplant recipient
major adverse kidney events
mean arterial pressure
mean corpuscular volume
mean difference
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs

D

R

AAMI
ACEi
ADQI
AIN
AKD
AKI
AKIN
ARB
ATI
ATN
AUROC
AUC
BMI
BP
CA-AKI
CDSS
CI
CKD
CRRT
CVVHD
CVVHDF
ECLS
eGFR
EHR
ERT
FDA
GLP-1 RA
GRADE
GFR
HD
HR
HRQoL
HVHF
ICU
IHD
IRRT
ISPD
KDIGO
KeGFR
KTR
MAKE
MAP
MCV
MD
MRA
NSAID

x

AF
T

odds ration
quality of life
peritoneal dialysis
population, intervention, comparator, outcomes, and study design
pediatric intensive care unit
prolonged intermittent renal replacement therapy
Renal Angina Index
renin-angiotensin system inhibitor
randomized controlled trial
risk difference
Risk, Injury, Failure; Loss, End-Stage Renal Disease
risk ratio
renal replacement therapy
serum creatinine
standard deviation
sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitor(s)
urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio
unfractionated heparin
United States
United States Renal Data System
World Health Organization

D

R

OR
QoL
PD
PICOS
PICU
PIRRT
RAI
RASi
RCT
RD
RIFLE
RR
RRT
SCr
SD
SGLT2i
UACR
UFH
U.S.
USRDS
WHO

xi

NOTICE
SECTION I: USE OF THE CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
This Clinical Practice Guideline document is based upon literature searches last conducted in
June 2025. It is designed to assist decision-making. It is not intended to define a standard of
care and should not be interpreted as prescribing an exclusive course of management.
Variations in practice will inevitably and appropriately occur when clinicians consider the
needs of individual patients, available resources, and limitations unique to an institution or type
of practice. Healthcare professionals using these recommendations should decide how to apply
them to their own clinical practice.

AF
T

SECTION II: DISCLOSURE

D

R

Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) makes every effort to avoid any actual
or reasonably perceived conflicts of interest that may arise from an outside relationship or a
personal, professional, or business interest of a member of the Work Group. All members of
the Work Group are required to complete, sign, and submit a disclosure and attestation form
showing all such relationships that might be perceived as or are actual conflicts of interest.
This document is updated annually, and information is adjusted accordingly. All reported
information is published in its entirety at the end of this document in the Work Group
members’ Disclosure section and is kept on file at KDIGO.

xii

WORK GROUP MEMBERSHIP
Work Group Co-Chairs
Marlies Ostermann, PhD, MD
Guy’s & St Thomas’ Hospital
London, UK

Matthew James, MD, PhD
University of Calgary
Calgary, Alberta, Canada

The Work Group consisted of a geographically diverse group of experts including the following specialties:
adult and pediatric nephrology, critical care medicine, emergency medicine, general medicine, pharmacy and
pharmacology, as well as people with lived experience of AKI.

AF
T

Methods Committee Representative
Gihad Nesrallah, MD, MSc, FRCPC, MBA
University of Toronto
Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Jitendra Meena, MD, DM
All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
New Delhi, Delhi, India

D

R

Evidence Review Team
Center for Evidence Synthesis in Health, Brown University School of Public Health,
Providence, Rhode Island, USA
Ethan M. Balk, MD, MPH, Project Director, Evidence Review Team Director
Craig E. Gordon, MD, MS, Assistant Project Director, Evidence Review Team Associate Director;
Professor of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Tufts University School of
Medicine
Gaelen P. Adam, MLIS, MPH, PhD, Senior Research Associate, Information Specialist

xiii

ABSTRACT

AF
T

The Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) 2026 Clinical Practice
Guideline for Acute Kidney Injury (AKI) and Acute Kidney Disease (AKD) is an update of the
KDIGO 2012 guideline on the topic. The guideline informs the care of adults and children at
risk for or with AKI and AKD. The guideline includes chapters dedicated to AKI and AKD
definition, identification, and classification; AKI prediction, risk stratification, and diagnostic
evaluation; prevention and treatment of AKI, drug- and nephrotoxin-associated AKI; renal
replacement therapy; and follow-up care after AKI or AKD. The update considers evidence
from studies published through June 2025. The guideline provides actionable recommendations
based on a rigorous formal evidence review, practice points that were not based on a
systematic review and supporting infographics. The target audiences for the guideline are
healthcare professionals involved in the care of people with AKI or AKD as well as people
with or after resolution of AKI themselves. Development of the guideline followed an explicit
process of evidence review and appraisal. The guideline recommendations are based on
systematic reviews of relevant studies, and appraisal of the certainty of evidence and of the
strength of recommendations following the “Grading of Recommendations Assessment,
Development and Evaluation” (GRADE) approach. Limitations of the evidence are discussed
and suggested areas for future research are also presented.

D

R

Keywords: acute kidney disease, acute kidney injury, evidence-based; guideline; KDIGO;
systematic review; GRADE

xiv

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATION STATEMENTS AND
PRACTICE POINTS
CHAPTER 1. AKI AND AKD DEFINITION, IDENTIFICATION,
AND CLASSIFICATION
1.1. Definition of AKI
Practice Point 1.1.1: Acute kidney injury (AKI) in children and adults is defined by the
presence of one or more abnormalities of kidney function or structure known or
presumed to have occurred within 7 days, in the appropriate clinical context (Table 1).

AF
T

Table 1 | Criteria for acute kidney injury for children and adults (any one or more of the
following within the corresponding time period)
Functional criteria
Structural criteria
• Increase in SCr by ≥0.3 mg/dl
• Elevation of a biomarker of kidney
(≥26.5 µmol/l) within 48 hours
damage when used for its clinically
validated and regulatory qualified
• Increase in SCr by ≥1.5 times
indication, which is known or
baseline that is known or presumed
presumed to have occurred within
to have occurred within the prior 7
the prior 7 days
days

R

• Increase in serum cystatin C by
≥1.5 times baseline that is known or
presumed to have occurred within
the prior 7 days

D

• Mean urine volume of less than 0.5
ml/kg/h (based on ideal body
weight) for ≥6 hours
SCr, serum creatinine

Recommendation 1.1.1: We suggest using serum cystatin C to identify AKI in children
and adults in clinical situations when serum creatinine (SCr) is less accurate (2B).
Practice Point 1.1.2: A baseline SCr value should be ascertained for all patients with
suspected or confirmed AKI.
Practice Point 1.1.3: In adults, select the baseline SCr or cystatin C for an AKI episode
using a hierarchical approach (Figure 1).

1

AF
T

Figure 1 | Hierarchical approach to the selection of the baseline SCr value used to
characterize an AKI event in adults*. *A representative primary care/outpatient serum
creatinine (SCr) should ideally reflect the stable clinical state, and may be a mean, median, or
most recent value between 8–365 days before a hospital admission (or acute event). AKI,
acute kidney injury; Cys C, cystatin C; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; RRT,
renal replacement therapy

D

R

1.2. Staging of AKI
Practice Point 1.2.1: The severity of AKI in children and adults is staged according to
individual components or combinations of the following SCr and urine output criteria
and presence or absence of an elevated biomarker of kidney stress or damage (Table 6).

2

Table 6 | Severity staging system for AKI
Functional criteria
Serum creatinine
Stage

Criteria

C0

C1

C2

Structural criteria
Urine output

Stage

Criteria

U0
≥0.3 mg/dl (≥26.5
µmol/l) increase,
Or
1.5-1.9 times
baseline

U1

2–2.9 times baseline

U2

Damage biomarker
Stage

Criteria

B1

Positive

B0

Negative

B1

Positive

B0

Negative

B1

Positive

<0.5 ml/kg/h for 6–
12 hours

<0.5 ml/kg/h for
>12 hours

AF
T

≥3.0 times baseline,
Or
B0
Negative
Increase in SCr to
<0.3 ml/kg/h for
C3
≥4.0 mg/dl (≥353.6
U3
>24 hours or anuria
µmol/l)
for >12 hours
B1
Positive
Or
Initiation of RRT
*C1-C3 indicates acute kidney injury (AKI) severity stage according to serum creatinine (SCr)
criteria, U1-U3 indicates AKI severity stage according to urine output criteria, B0/B1 indicates
staging by absence or presence of an elevated damage biomarker. Relevant components of the staging
system can be employed to classify the severity of AKI according to the measurements collected for
an individual. RRT, renal replacement therapy

R

Practice Point 1.2.2: Transient AKI is differentiated from persistent AKI based on an
increase in SCr or cystatin C or decrease in urine output lasting ≤48 versus >48 hours
(Table 7).

D

Table 7 | Definitions of transient and persistent AKI
Duration of reduction in kidney function
Transient AKI
≤48 hour increase in SCr or cystatin C or reduced urine output
Persistent AKI
>48 hour and up to 7 days increase in SCr or cystatin C or
reduced urine output
AKI, acute kidney injury; SCr, serum creatinine

Practice Point 1.2.3: The underlying cause of AKI should be identified based on
susceptibilities and exposures, clinical context, history and physical examination, and
appropriate diagnostic laboratory and imaging testing to inform specific management.
1.3. Definition of AKD
Practice Point 1.3.1: Acute kidney disease (AKD) in children and adults is defined as
the presence of any of the following functional or structural criteria in the appropriate
clinical context with a duration ≤3 months (Table 9).
3

Table 9 | Criteria for AKD (any one or more of the following with a duration ≤3 months)
Functional criteria
Structural criteria
AKI (by functional criteria),
AKI (by structural criteria)
Or
Or
GFR <60 ml/min per 1.73 m2*
Marker of kidney damage (albuminuria,
Or
hematuria, or leukocyturia are most common)
2
Decrease in GFR by ≥35 ml/min per 1.73 m
from baseline
Or
Increase in SCr by >50%
*GFR <60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 criterion does not apply to children younger than 2 years old. AKI,
acute kidney disease; AKI, acute kidney injury; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; SCr, serum creatinine

AF
T

Practice Point 1.3.2: AKD without AKI should be differentiated from AKD following
AKI because the underlying causes and clinical management can be different.
1.4. AKI and AKD resolution
Practice Point 1.4.1: Complete and partial resolution of AKI and AKD are defined by
changes in SCr, serum cystatin C, or estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) as
shown in Table 10.
Table 10 | Criteria for resolution of AKI and AKD
Complete resolution
AKI
SCr or serum cystatin C <1.2 times higher
than baseline within 7 days
AKD SCr or serum cystatin C <1.2 times higher
than baseline,
Or
eGFR >80% of baseline within 3 months

R

Partial resolution
SCr or serum cystatin C ≥1.2 to <1.5 times
higher than baseline within 7 days
SCr or serum cystatin C ≥1.2 to <1.5 times
higher than baseline,
Or
eGFR <80% to >66% of baseline within 3
months
AKD, acute kidney disease; AKI, acute kidney injury; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate;
SCr, serum creatinine

D

1.5. Recurrent AKI
Practice Point 1.5.1: Recurrent AKI is defined as a new episode of AKI occurring after
partial or complete resolution from a previous episode of AKI.
1.6. Considerations specific to children
1.6.1. Definition of AKI
Practice Point 1.6.1.1: Age specific references ranges should be used when serum
cystatin C is used to detect AKI in children
1.6.2. Determination of baseline kidney function
Practice Point 1.6.2.1: In children (except neonates), select the baseline SCr or serum
cystatin C for an AKI episode using a hierarchical approach (Figure 3).

4

AF
T

Figure 3 | Hierarchical approach to the selection of the baseline SCr value used to
characterize an AKI event in children*. *A representative outpatient SCr should ideally
reflect the mean, median, or most recent value within 3 months of admission or acute event.
AKI, acute kidney injury; Cys C, cystatin C; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate;
RRT, renal replacement therapy; SCr, serum creatinine
Practice Point 1.6.2.2: In children, specific considerations related to age are needed
when determining a baseline SCr.

R

1.6.3. Criteria for neonatal AKI
Practice Point 1.6.3.1: The criteria for neonatal AKI include a lack of decline in SCr
within the first 7 days of birth, in addition to neonatal specific increases in SCr or
cystatin C levels, or reduced urine output. (Table 12).

D

Table 12 | Criteria for AKI in neonates (any one or more of the following within the
corresponding time period)
Neonatal AKI criteria
• No decline in SCr from birth to 7 days of life
• Increase in SCr by ≥0.3 mg/dl (≥26.5 µmol/l) within 48 hours
• Increase in SCr by ≥1.5 times baseline that is known or presumed to have
occurred within the prior 7 days
• Increase in serum cystatin C by 1.25 times baseline that is known or
presumed to have occurred within the prior 7 days
• Serum cystatin C >2.2 mg/dl
• Urine output of less than 1.0 ml/kg/h for ≥24 hours
AKI, acute kidney injury; SCr, serum creatinine

5

1.6.4. AKI staging in neonates
Practice Point 1.6.4.1: In neonates, the severity of AKI is staged according to individual
components or combinations of the following SCr and urine output criteria (Table 13).

C2

AF
T

Table 13 | AKI staging criteria in neonates
Functional criteria
Serum creatinine
Urine output
Stage
Criteria
Stage
Criteria
No decline in SCr from
birth to 7 days of life,
Or
>0.5 and ≤1.0
C1
≥0.3 mg/dl (26.5
U1
ml/kg/h for 24 h
µmol/l) increase,
Or
1.5–1.9 times baseline
2–2.9 times baseline

U2

>0.3 and ≤0.5
ml/kg/h for 24 h

D

R

≥3 times baseline
Or
Increase in SCr to ≥2.5
≤0.3 ml/kg/h for
C3
U3
mg/dl (220 µmol/l),
24 h
Or
Initiation of RRT
C1-C3 indicates AKI severity stage according to serum creatinine (SCr) criteria, U1-U3 indicates
AKI severity stage according to urine output criteria, B-/B+ indicates staging by absence or presence
of an elevated damage biomarker. AKI, acute kidney injury; RRT, renal replacement therapy

6

CHAPTER 2. AKI PREDICTION, RISK STRATIFICATION, AND
DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION
2.1. Risk prediction models
Recommendation 2.1.1: We suggest using externally validated clinical risk models to
identify children and adults at increased risk of AKI and guide the use of kidneyprotective strategies (2C).
Recommendation 2.1.2: We recommend using externally validated clinical risk models
to identify adults at risk of receiving renal replacement therapy (RRT) for AKI to
inform patient choices and shared decision making about their care (1C).

AF
T

Practice Point 2.1.1: In community and low-resource settings, simplified AKI risk
scores can support early identification and management of adults at risk for
community-acquired AKI.

Practice Point 2.1.2: The performance of electronic health record (EHR)-based AKI
risk models should be tested in the settings they will be deployed. Harmonizing
terminology and data structure within EHR systems and reassessment of performance
over time is needed to ensure predictive accuracy in a local setting and over time.

R

2.2. Electronic AKI alerts
Recommendation 2.2.1: We recommend against delivering interruptive, creatininebased electronic alerts for AKI in isolation without systematic strategies for response in
routine clinical care of adults (1B).

D

2.3. Kidney functional testing
Practice Point 2.3.1: Assessment of kidney functional reserve before a potential
exposure may help to identify children and adults with an increased likelihood of
developing AKI.
Recommendation 2.3.1: We suggest using the furosemide stress test (FST) to assess the
risk of progression to Stage 3 AKI, including RRT in adults (2C) and children (2B) with
Stage 1 or 2 AKI who are euvolemic or hypervolemic.
Recommendation 2.3.2: We suggest calculating kinetic estimated glomerular filtration
rate (KeGFR) in hospitalized adults with or at risk of AKI when an estimate of GFR
under non-steady-state conditions will affect clinical decision-making (2B).

7

2.4. Biomarkers for AKI risk stratification
Practice Point 2.4.1: Baseline albuminuria (measured by urine albumin-to-creatinine
ratio [UACR or dipstick protein testing]) offers additional prognostic value to eGFR for
evaluating AKI risk in adults across various settings.
Recommendation 2.4.1: In acute care settings where children and adults are susceptible
to AKI, we suggest using biomarkers of kidney tubular stress or damage according to
their clinically validated and regulatory approved indication for the early identification
of people at risk of moderate or severe AKI, to inform targeted kidney-protective
strategies (adults: 2B; children: 2C).

AF
T

Practice Point 2.4.2: Biomarkers of kidney stress (e.g., urine [TIMP-2]*[IGFBP7]) can
be used to assess the risk of moderate-to-severe AKI in critically ill adults, especially
within the first 12 hours of ICU admission or after high-risk events including major
surgery or sepsis.
Practice Point 2.4.3: Biomarkers of kidney damage (e.g., urine NGAL) can be used to
identify children and adults at high risk of severe AKI in hospital settings.

R

2.5. Tests for AKI etiology and diagnostic evaluation
Recommendation 2.5.1. In adults with AKI, we suggest urine microscopy as part of the
diagnostic evaluation, particularly when the etiology is unclear or intrinsic kidney
disease is suspected, as urine sediment examination can provide diagnostic and
prognostic information that complements clinical assessment and other laboratory
studies (2D).

D

Practice Point 2.5.1: Muddy brown granular casts and renal tubular epithelial cells can
assist in distinguishing acute tubular injury (ATI) from hemodynamic-mediated AKI
and predict progression to severe AKI.
Practice Point 2.5.2: Urine eosinophil testing has low sensitivity and moderate
specificity, limiting its diagnostic value particularly for excluding a diagnosis of acute
interstitial nephritis (AIN).
Practice Point 2.5.3: Urinary inflammatory cytokines may be useful in distinguishing
AIN from other causes of AKI or AKD in adults.
Practice Point 2.5.4: Urine chemistries, including fractional excretion of sodium (FeNa)
and fractional excretion of urea (FeUrea) should be reserved for use in differentiating
hemodynamic-mediated (prerenal) AKI from ATI in selected clinical scenarios and
groups of children and adults with AKI, due to their limited overall clinical utility.

8

Practice Point 2.5.5: In adults with cirrhosis-associated AKI, FeNa can be an adjunctive
tool to distinguish hepatorenal syndrome from ATI when interpreted in the appropriate
clinical context.
Practice Point 2.5.6: In adults with cirrhosis-associated AKI, urinary or plasma NGAL
may be an adjunct to help differentiate between ATI and hepatorenal syndrome,
particularly when clinical features or response to volume expansion or vasoconstrictor
therapy are equivocal.
Practice Point 2.5.7: Kidney biopsy should be considered for children and adults with
unexplained AKI when clinical evaluation does not clearly differentiate among potential
causes or the findings are expected to influence management decisions.

AF
T

Practice Point 2.5.8: Kidney Doppler ultrasound, including measurement of renal
resistive index (RRI), may aid in risk stratification for AKI progression and severity,
particularly in critically ill populations.
Practice Point 2.5.9: In hospitalized or critically ill patients with AKI, point-of-care
ultrasound (POCUS) may assist in assessing volume status and distinguishing volume
responsive AKI from intrinsic AKI.
2.6. Considerations specific to children
Practice Point 2.6.1: Children at increased risk for community-acquired AKI should
undergo a kidney health assessment during episodes of acute illness.

D

R

Recommendation 2.6.1: For critically ill children at risk for AKI, we suggest using the
renal angina index (RAI) to identify children at high risk of severe AKI and RRT (2B).

9

CHAPTER 3. PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF AKI
3.1 Fluid management
Recommendation 3.1.1: We recommend using crystalloids rather than colloids
(albumin, gelatin, or starches) as initial management for intravascular volume
expansion in children and adults at risk of or with AKI or AKD (1B).
Recommendation 3.1.2: We recommend using buffered crystalloids instead of 0.9%
saline for volume expansion in the absence of traumatic brain injury in children and
adults at risk of or with AKI or AKD (1B).

AF
T

Recommendation 3.1.3: For children and adults with AKI or AKD who have severe
metabolic acidosis with acidemia (pH <7.20), we suggest the use of intravenous
bicarbonate over RRT unless there is another urgent indication for RRT (2C).
Practice Point 3.1.1: Offer oral rehydration to children and adults at risk of or with
AKI or AKD being managed in settings where volume expansion with intravenous fluid
administration is not possible or practical.
Recommendation 3.1.4: For adults undergoing elective major abdominal surgery, we
recommend a liberal intravenous fluid management strategy, aiming for a positive fluid
balance gain of 1–2 kg at 24 hours after surgery, over a restrictive strategy (net zero
fluid balance) (1B).

R

3.2 Hemodynamic management
Practice Point 3.2.1: Use hemodynamic monitoring strategies for adults at risk of and
with AKI to assess adequate organ perfusion and oxygen delivery, which will be
context-sensitive and resource availability dependent.

D

Practice Point 3.2.2: Use vasoactive medications in conjunction with fluids in children
and adults with hypotension not responsive to initial fluid administration and who are
at risk of or have AKI.
Recommendation 3.2.1: We suggest a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of >65 mm Hg as a
target to guide fluid and vasopressor administration in critically ill adults at high risk
of or with AKI (2C).
Practice Point 3.2.3: Higher or lower MAP targets may be appropriate for individual
critically ill adults, for instance to maintain renal perfusion in patients with chronic
hypertension and to avoid adverse effects of excessive vasopressor therapy in patients
with chronic hypotension.

10

Recommendation 3.2.2: We recommend against using low-dose dopamine for kidney
protection in children or adults at risk of or with AKI or AKD (1A).
Recommendation 3.2.3: We recommend the use of a multicomponent kidney-protection
strategy in adult surgical patients at high risk for AKI identified by clinical factors and
biomarkers (Figure 9; 1B).

AF
T

Practice Point 3.2.4: In children and adults with established AKI or AKD, kidneyprotection strategies should be considered.

Figure 9 | Multicomponent kidney protection strategy for prevention and management
of AKI. AKI, acute kidney injury

R

3.3 Use of diuretics
Recommendation 3.3.1: We suggest use of diuretics in the management of clinically
significant volume overload of children and adults with or at risk of AKI or AKD (2B).

D

Practice Point 3.3.1: Intermittent boluses, rather than continuous infusions of loop
diuretics, are appropriate as the initial diuretic management strategy in adults with or
at risk of AKI or AKD.
Recommendation 3.3.2: We recommend initial use of diuretics in preference to
extracorporeal fluid removal for adults at risk of or with AKI or AKD who have
clinically significant volume overload in the absence of another indication for RRT
(1C).
3.4 Glucose control
Practice Point 3.4.1: Insulin therapy targeting a plasma glucose level of 140–180 mg/dl
(7.8–10 mmol/) is acceptable over more aggressive targets in critically ill children and
adults with or at risk of AKI or AKD.

11

3.5 Prevention of cardiac surgery-associated AKI
Recommendation 3.5.1: In adults without advanced CKD having cardiac surgery, we
suggest that prophylactic intravenous amino acid administration can be used to prevent
AKI (2A).
Recommendation 3.5.2: We suggest remote ischemic preconditioning for patients at
high risk for AKI undergoing cardiac surgery without propofol anesthesia to prevent
AKI in children (2D) and adults (2B).
3.6 Hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI
Recommendation 3.6.1: We recommend the use of vasoconstrictor therapy for adults
with hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI (1C).

AF
T

Practice Point 3.6.1: The choice of vasoconstrictor should be based on the clinical care
context and patient condition. Terlipressin or norepinephrine are preferrable therapies;
midodrine with octreotide can be used as an alternative for adults if terlipressin and
norepinephrine are unavailable.
3.7 Tumor lysis syndrome-associated AKI
Practice Point 3.7.1: Volume expansion without urinary alkalinization using
intravenous crystalloids should be done in children and adults with or at risk of tumor
lysis syndrome.

R

Recommendation 3.7.1: In children and adults with or at high risk of tumor lysis
syndrome, we recommend rasburicase over allopurinol or febuxostat, if not
contraindicated due to glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency (1B).

D

Practice Point 3.7.2: In children and adults at lower risk of tumor lysis syndrome, or
when rasburicase is contraindicated or inaccessible, xanthine oxidase inhibitors may be
used.
3.8 Rhabdomyolysis- and hemolysis-associated AKI
Practice Point 3.8.1: Use intravenous crystalloids for volume expansion in children and
adults at risk of or with heme pigment nephropathy due to rhabdomyolysis or
hemolysis.
3.9 Nutritional intervention in AKI
Practice Point 3.9.1: Nutrition should be provided preferentially via the enteral route in
children and adults at risk of or with AKI or AKD.
Practice Point 3.9.2: Avoid restriction of protein intake with the aim of preventing or
delaying initiation of RRT in children and adults with AKI or AKD.

12

Practice Point 3.9.3: Excessive protein intake should be avoided in adults with AKI or
AKD.
Practice Point 3.9.4: Caloric targets do not need to be changed due to AKI or AKD in
children or adults, unless they are receiving RRT.
Practice Point 3.9.5: Regular review and supplementation of water-soluble vitamins and
micronutrients should be considered in children and adults receiving continuous RRT
(CRRT).

AF
T

3.10 AKI in pregnancy
Practice Point 3.10.1: Pregnant women with AKI or AKD require specific treatments,
including consideration of early delivery.
3.11 Environmental and tropical AKI
Practice Point 3.11.1: For children and adults presenting with AKD or AKI in tropical
and subtropical regions, evaluate for region-specific infectious and environmental
causes and initiate early disease-specific therapy in addition to standard supportive
management of AKI.
Practice Point 3.11.2: For children and adults presenting with AKD or AKI in regions
where traditional medicines and toxic chemicals are used, include AKI due to toxins in
the differential diagnosis.

R

Practice Point 3.11.3: For children and adults presenting with AKD or AKI following
prolonged exposure to high temperatures, consider heat injury as a cause of AKI.

D

3.12 Considerations specific in children
3.12.1 Hemodynamic management
Practice Point 3.12.1.1: Use age-appropriate blood pressure targets to guide
hemodynamic management in children at risk or with AKI.
3.12.2 Nutritional intervention in AKI
Practice Point 3.12.2.1.: In children with AKI or AKD, age-recommended protein
targets can be used without protein restriction, and a minimum daily protein intake of
2.5 grams/kg should be maintained for children receiving CRRT.
Practice Point 3.12.2.2: Supplement water-soluble vitamins routinely in children
receiving CRRT.
3.12.3 Hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI
Practice Point 3.12.3.1: It is reasonable to use terlipressin or norepinephrine for
children with hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI depending on the clinical care
context and patient condition.
13

3.12.4 Theophylline use in neonates
Recommendation 3.12.4.1: We recommend a single dose of theophylline be given to
neonates with severe perinatal asphyxia for the prevention of AKI (1A).

D

R

AF
T

3.12.5 Use of nitric oxide in children
Recommendation 3.12.5.1: We recommend against routine use of inhaled nitric oxide to
prevent cardiac surgery-associated AKI in children with low-complexity cardiac lesions
and no signs of pulmonary hypertension or right ventricular dysfunction undergoing
cardiopulmonary bypass (1C).

14

CHAPTER 4. DRUG- AND NEPHROTOXIN-ASSOCIATED
AKI

R

AF
T

4.1. Categorization and classification of medications associated with AKI
Practice Point 4.1.1: Drugs that may contribute to AKI can be classified into one of 4
categories based on kidney function and damage biomarkers assessed at the time of
exposure (Figure 11).

D

Figure 11 | Classifying drugs that potentially cause AKI.530 Iterative classification of
agents that have potential to cause kidney dysfunction/abnormal kidney function or kidney
injury or both. Functional and injury biomarkers have a role in distinguishing among the
different pathophysiological processes. Examples of deleterious risk modifiers are duration
of therapy, drug burden, hypotension, and pharmaco/pharmacodynamic interactions.
Examples of interventions to mitigate risk are daily dynamic prescribing, kidney monitoring,
and patient and provider education. Susceptibility factors include those listed in Table 14 in
Chapter 2. Any final impact depends on underlying susceptibility, associated risk factors,
clinical context, drug management, and modifying factors. Examples of drugs that
correspond to the relevant categories above include trimethoprim, cimetidine (neither
dysfunction nor damage); angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor
blockers (dysfunction without damage); aminoglycoside, acyclovir, vascular endothelial
growth factor antagonists (damage without dysfunction); and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (dysfunction and damage). AKI, acute kidney injury. Adapted from Ostermann et al.
2020.531
4.2. Kidney protective strategies
Recommendation 4.2.1: For children or adults with or at risk of AKI, we recommend
drug and nephrotoxin stewardship using a multimodal approach (1C).
15

Practice Point 4.2.1: Strategies to manage drug-related acute kidney disease include:
a) discontinuation of offending nephrotoxic agents known to cause kidney damage, if
possible;
b) provision of a therapeutic equivalent alternative that is less nephrotoxic, if
available and necessary;
c) reduction in dose if drug continuation is necessary for those drugs with a dose
dependent direct nephrotoxic effect.

AF
T

Practice Point 4.2.2: Therapeutic drug monitoring is a component of multimodal
stewardship that involves serial assessments of drug concentrations in children and
adults receiving potentially nephrotoxic drugs, drugs excreted by the kidneys, and
drugs with narrow therapeutic margins or low therapeutic indices.
Practice Point 4.2.3: Surveillance for pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic drugdrug interactions that increase the risk of AKI is a component of multimodal
stewardship.
Practice Point 4.2.4: Intravenous hydration strategies may be used for the prevention of
drug-induced crystalline nephropathies as part of multimodal stewardship.

R

4.3. Implementation of kidney protective strategies
Practice Point 4.3.1: Pharmacists should perform medication reconciliation and
medication regimen reviews and perform drug and nephrotoxin stewardship for
hospitalized children and adults with or at risk of AKI.

D

Practice Point 4.3.2: Clinical decision support systems (CDSS) can be an effective tool
to facilitate drug and nephrotoxin stewardship strategies in children and adults to
prevent drug-associated AKI or the development of adverse reactions from drugs
excreted by the kidney.
4.4 Biomarker characterization of drug-related AKI
Practice Point 4.4.1: Biomarkers of tubular damage are approved for monitoring of
drug-induced AKI.
Practice Point 4.4.2: Biomarkers may be useful for differentiating mechanisms and
etiologies of drug-related kidney diseases in children and adults.
4.5. Management of drugs eliminated by the kidneys
Practice Point 4.5.1: Dosing of drugs excreted by the kidneys should not be based on
creatinine clearance or glomerular filtration rate (GFR) estimated using equations that
assume a steady state of creatinine production and clearance in children and adults
children with developing or resolving AKI or AKD.
16

Practice Point 4.5.2: Trends in SCr and urine output should be used to guide dosing of
drugs excreted by the kidney. In adults with AKI, calculation of a KeGFR may be
useful when sufficient SCr measurements are available.
The Work Group agrees with the following practice point related to drug dosing from
the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD
and believes it also applies to people with AKI and AKD.
Practice Point 4.5.3: Consider and adapt drug dosing in people where GFR, non-GFR
determinants of the filtration markers, or volume of distribution are not in a steady
state.

D

R

AF
T

Practice Point 4.5.4: Assess and adjust drug dosing in children and adults receiving
CRRT based on drug-, patient-, and RRT-related factors (Table 34).

17

Table 34 | Drug-, patient-, and RRT-related factors to consider when determining drug doses for people receiving CRRT
Drug-related
• Medications eliminated by the kidney with volume of distribution <0.7 l/kg and/or protein-binding <80% are likely
factors
to be removed with CRRT and may require supplemental dosing with CRRT use.

•
•
•
•
•
•

D
R

Patientrelated
factors

Molecular weight of a drug is an important consideration when using CRRT diffusive techniques compared to
convective techniques because the diffusion coefficient, or saturation coefficient (Sd or SA) is inversely
proportional to the molecular weight such that, as the SA decreases, the molecular weight increases. Conversely,
convective transport across modern membranes is independent of molecular weight in convective hemofiltration
techniques.594, 595
Most drugs have a molecular weight <2000 Daltons and are removed to some extent with newer high-flux and super
high-flux dialyzers that have a pore size between 10,000–30,000 (likely diffusion technique, as well)
Administering supplement doses for drugs with >30%–40% post-hemodialysis removal is suggested.
Optimal dosage regimens for medications eliminated by the kidney and nephrotoxic medications (e.g., digoxin,
vancomycin, aminoglycosides, and calcineurin inhibitors) can be achieved by performing therapeutic drug
monitoring in people who are critically ill receiving RRT.
For antibiotic dose adjustments during AKI and RRT, be mindful of pharmacokinetic target concentration
attainment and optimizing pharmacodynamic effects with consideration to the antibiotic concentration and time
dependent bactericidal effects.
Hypoalbuminemia affects drugs that are highly bound to albumin, by increasing free fraction of the drug leading to
increased clearance and volume of distribution.
Fluid resuscitation, and capillary leak increase the volume of distribution of hydrophilic drugs, for example in
people with sepsis. This may require a loading dose in the range of 25% more than usual.
People with significant urine output (e.g., >20 ml/hr or 500 ml/day), should have clearance from the residual urine
volume added to RRT clearance calculations to determine total drug clearance for the person.
Non-kidney drug clearance can be affected by RRT for AKI. Drugs eliminated by the liver and formed metabolites
may accumulate during AKI, while RRT can possibly increase CYP3A4 activity. Estimating non-kidney clearance
in people who are critically ill is challenging without assessing serum drug levels due to the various pathways
involved in drug metabolism and clearance.

AF
T

•

•
•

18

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Effluent flow rate determines drug clearance in CRRT given it is slower than the blood flow rate and more drug
removal occurs with faster effluent flow rates.596
If RRT is <25% of the patient’s clearance (sum of residual kidney and non-kidney), then RRT appears not to add
significantly to person’s drug elimination process.595
RRT modality affects drug clearance such that when a similar blood flow rate is used, drug elimination by RRT can
be ordered from the highest to lowest as follows: CVVHDF > CVVH > IHD. 594
For CRRT, clearance can be estimated by checking the run time and subtracting the down time.
Replacement fluid is commonly provided in convective techniques of RRT, either pre- or post-dilution modes. Predilution mode reduces drug clearance more than post-dilution by approximately 15%.594
Hemofilter lifespan can affect solute clearance (i.e., older filters provide less clearance).
Membrane types affect adsorption and adsorption is inversely correlated to effluent flow rate. 594, 597, 598
Drug removal estimates for IHD are not equivalent to CRRT. When suing drug removal estimates from primary or
secondary sources, it is important to confirm that the RRT modality, technique, and settings are the same as the
patient scenario being evaluated.

AF
T

RRT-related
factors*

D
R

*RRT related factors do not apply to children due to the size of the extracorporeal volume. AKI, acute kidney injury; CRRT, continuous renal replacement
therapy; CVVH, continuous venovenous hemofiltration; CVVHD, continuous venovenous hemodialysis; CVVHDF, continuous venovenous
hemodiafiltration, IHD, intermittent hemodialysis, PIRRT, prolonged intermittent renal replacement therapy; RRT, renal replacement therapy

19

4.6. AKI following other nephrotoxic exposures
Practice Point 4.6.1: In children and adults presenting with community-acquired AKI,
perform a thorough social, occupational, and demographic history to understand
potential exposures to pesticides and environmental exposures as a possible cause of
AKI.
Practice Point 4.6.2: Determine and limit the use of natural products that have the
potential to contribute to AKI and AKD through patient-centered discussions.
4.7. Contrast-associated AKI (CA-AKI): Recognition
Practice Point 4.7.1: Consider the differential diagnosis of post-contrast AKI, which
may have causes other than contrast exposure.

AF
T

4.8. Contrast-associated AKI: Risk assessment
Practice Point 4.8.1: Use validated tools to assess the risk of AKI in adults receiving
intra-arterial radiocontrast for cardiac procedures.
Practice Point 4.8.2: Assess children and adults being considered for intravenous
radiocontrast administration for risk factors for contrast-associated AKI, and in
particular screen for preexisting impairment of kidney function.

D

R

4.9. Contrast-associated AKI: Prevention
4.9.1. Choice of imaging technique
Practice Point 4.9.1.1: Following a risk assessment, the decision to administer
intravascular contrast for a diagnostic or interventional procedure should be made
weighing the risks versus benefits of the procedure. Where the perceived benefit exceeds
the risk, contrast procedures should not be deferred or delayed. However, alternative
imaging methods should be used for people with or at high risk of contrast-associated
AKI (CA-AKI) (Figure 12).

20

AF
T

Figure 12 | Approach to risk assessment for CA-AKI with diagnostic or interventional
contrast imaging procedures. CA-AKI, contrast-associated acute kidney injury

R

Practice Point 4.9.1.2: Iso-osmolar or low-osmolar iodinated contrast media may be
used in children and adults at risk of CA-AKI (1B).

D

Practice Point 4.9.1.3: For children and adults at high risk of CA-AKI, use the lowest
possible dose of intravascular radiocontrast to achieve adequate imaging.
4.9.2. Contrast-associated AKI Prevention: Fluid administration
Practice Point 4.9.2.1: For children and adults at high risk of CA-AKI, incorporate
volume status assessment into intravenous hydration management strategies to reduce
the risk of AKI.
Recommendation 4.9.2.1: For adults at high risk of AKI without fluid overload
undergoing intravascular iodinated contrast-based procedures, we recommend
prophylactic periprocedural volume expansion with 0.9% saline over hypotonic
solutions (e.g., 0.45% saline), sodium bicarbonate, or no intravenous hydration (1B).

21

Practice Point 4.9.2.2: In the absence of volume overload, it is appropriate to hold
diuretics when administering isotonic crystalloid to prevent CA-AKI in adults at high
risk.
4.9.3 Prophylactic therapies: Medication management
The Work Group agrees with the following practice point and radiology guideline
statements related to the intravenous administration of radiocontrast from the KDIGO 2024
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD.
Practice Point 4.9.3.1: The intravenous administration of radiocontrast media can be
managed in accordance with consensus statements from the radiology societies in
people with AKI or GFR <60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 (CKD G3a–G5) undergoing elective
investigation.

D

R

AF
T

The Work Group refers the reader to the most recent radiology guidelines specifically
noting the difference between intravenous and intra-arterial radiocontrast:
• Use of low-osmolality contrast media and iso-osmolarity contrast media
• Use of minimum radiocontrast dose to achieve a diagnostic study
• Withdrawal of nonessential potentially nephrotoxic medications (e.g., NSAIDs,
diuretics, aminoglycosides, amphotericin, platins, zoledronate, and methotrexate) in
people with AKI or eGFR <30 ml/min per 1.73 m2 for 24–48 hours before and 48
hours after radiocontrast exposure
• In people with eGFR >30 ml/min per 1.73 m2 and without evidence of AKI,
metformin need not be stopped before iodinated contrast media (ICM)
administration, and there is no need for testing to evaluate GFR afterward. For
people with AKI or an eGFR ≤30 ml/min per 1.73 m2, it remains appropriate to stop
metformin at the time of or before ICM injection and should not be restarted for at
least 48 hours and only then if GFR remains stable and the ongoing use of
metformin has been reassessed by the clinical team.673
• Consideration of avoiding dehydration for people not undergoing dialysis and who
have eGFR <30 ml/min per 1.73 m2 or AKI and receiving intravenous contrast.674,
675

•

•

Use of N-acetylcysteine, ascorbic acid, furosemide, dopamine, fenoldopam, or
calcium channel blockers as preventative measures of CA-AKI has not been shown
to be a consistent benefit.613
Prophylactic pericontrast hemodialysis has been shown to be potentially harmful
and is not recommended.613

Recommendation 4.9.3.1: We suggest not routinely withholding renin-angiotensin
system inhibitors (RASi) before procedures with iodinated radiocontrast administration
in adults (2C).

22

4.10 Temporary withdrawal of medications to prevent AKI during major surgery
Recommendation 4.10.1: We suggest not routinely withholding renin-angiotensin
system inhibitors (RASi) to prevent AKI in adults having elective major cardiac (2D) or
non-cardiac surgery (2B).
4.11 Medication management during intercurrent illness or “sick day protocols”
Recommendation 4.11.1: We suggest temporarily stopping specific classes of drugs in
the context of acute illnesses that predispose to volume depletion, to prevent AKI caused
by hypovolemia (2D).

AF
T

The Work Group also agrees with the following practice point from Section 4.3 of the
KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD and
believe it also applies to people with AKI or AKD:16
Practice Point 4.11.1: If medications are discontinued during an acute illness,
communicate a clear plan of when to restart the discontinued medications to
the affected person and healthcare professionals, and ensure documentation
in the medical record.

4.12. Considerations specific to children
4.12.1 Biomarker characterization of drug-related AKI
Practice Point 4.12.1.1: Urine biomarkers of kidney damage can be helpful in detecting
nephrotoxin-associated AKI in newborns..

D

R

4.12.2. Management of drugs eliminated by the kidney
Practice Point 4.12.2.1: Trends in SCr and urine output can be used to guide dosing of
drugs excreted by the kidney. The validity of KeGFR equations to inform drug dosing
in children is uncertain.

23

CHAPTER 5. RENAL REPLACEMENT THERAPY
5.1. Starting renal replacement therapy (RRT)
Practice Point 5.1.1: For children and adults with AKI, a process of informed shared
decision-making should be used with patients, family, caregivers, and healthcare
professionals on the relative merit and risk of treatment with RRT.
Recommendation 5.1.1: For adults with AKI, we recommend a strategy of deferred
timing of RRT initiation as preferred over a strategy of early (pre-emptive) RRT
initiation (1C).

AF
T

Practice Point 5.1.2: For children and adults with AKI and high probability of
requiring RRT, planning for RRT should be considered before indications are met,
including, where applicable and available, transfer to centers with nephrology and RRT
services.
Practice Point 5.1.3: For children and adults with AKI and medically refractory fluid,
electrolyte, acid-base, and/or metabolic complications (e.g., uremia), initiate RRT if
consistent with patient preferences and goals of care.

R

Practice Point 5.1.4: Among patients with hepatic encephalopathy (grade ≥2) due to
acute or acute-on-chronic liver failure, initiation of continuous RRT (CRRT) to manage
hyperammonemia may be considered even when conventional RRT indications are
absent.
Practice Point 5.1.5: For critically ill children and adults with AKI, a time-limited trial
of RRT can be started if uremic and/or metabolic complications are plausibly
confounding neurological evaluation or chances of awakening from coma.

D

Practice Point 5.1.6: For children and adults with AKI, particularly those receiving
vasoactive support, identify and treat modifiable factors and mitigators of
hemodynamic instability at the commencement of RRT.
5.2. RRT modality
Practice Point 5.2.1: The initial selection of RRT modality in children and adults with
AKI, including CRRT, intermittent RRT (IRRT), or acute peritoneal dialysis (PD),
should integrate patient characteristics, clinical context, local expertise, and resource
availability.
Recommendation 5.2.1: For critically ill adults with AKI and hemodynamic instability,
we suggest using CRRT or acute PD over conventional IRRT (2C).
24

Practice Point: 5.2.2: CRRT is preferable to conventional IRRT for critically ill children
and adults with AKI and acute brain injury or other causes or risks of increased
intracranial pressure (ICP) or cerebral edema.
Practice Point 5.2.3: For children and adults with AKI, particularly those requiring
vasoactive support, identify and treat modifiable factors and mitigators of
hemodynamic instability during RRT.
Practice Point 5.2.4: Prolonged IRRT (PIRRT) is an acceptable alternative to CRRT as
the initial RRT modality for hemodynamically unstable, critically ill adults with AKI.

AF
T

Practice Point 5.2.5: Transition from CRRT to IRRT can be considered when children
and adults who have not recovered from AKI are physiologically and metabolically able
to tolerate IRRT and the risks of intracranial hypertension or cerebral edema, if
applicable, are resolved.
5.3. RRT dose-intensity
Recommendation 5.3.1: We recommend delivering an effluent volume of 20-25 ml/kg/h
over higher volumes for solute clearance in adults receiving CRRT, or a Kt/V of 3.9 per
week over higher urea clearance in adults receiving IRRT or PIRRT for AKI (1B).

R

Practice Point 5.3.1: An initial CRRT dose-intensity for adults with high body mass
index (BMI; e.g., ≥30 kg/m2) based on ideal or adjusted body weight, rather than actual
body weight, can be used to avoid delivery of excess CRRT dose-intensity.

D

Recommendation 5.3.2: We recommend not prescribing high-volume hemofiltration
(HVHF) compared with standard CRRT dose-intensity for critically ill adults with AKI
in the setting of sepsis or septic shock (1B).
Practice Point 5.3.2: The adequacy of the RRT dose-intensity to correct for electrolyte,
acid-base, and metabolic (e.g., nitrogenous waste) derangements should be reviewed
daily for CRRT and prior to starting each RRT session for IRRT and the prescription
adjusted when needed.
Practice Point 5.3.3: When using acute PD for adults with AKI, deliver a weekly Kt/V
of 2.2 (18-24 l PD fluid/day) over higher doses.
Practice Point 5.3.4: In adults with AKI, the initial PD prescription, including duration
of cycle time and glucose concentration of PD fluid, may need to be modified to rapidly
correct acid-base, electrolyte, metabolic, or fluid complications in adults with AKI.

25

5.4 Catheters for RRT
Practice Point 5.4.1: Vascular access for RRT, including type, size, length, and site of
catheter placement, should consider feasibility and weigh the risks of catheter
colonization/infection or bleeding with the desire to maintain catheter/circuit patency in
children and adults.
Practice Point 5.4.2: Adoption of standardized care bundles for dialysis catheter
insertion and maintenance can reduce the risk of complications.
Practice Point 5.4.3: Use of existing arteriovenous fistulas/grafts may be suitable for
IRRT in children and adults to avoid new dialysis catheter placement.

AF
T

Practice Point 5.4.4: It is preferable to avoid using existing arteriovenous (AV)
fistulas/grafts for CRRT in children or adults, due to concern for needle dislodgement
or arteriovenous fistulae/graft damage with prolonged cannulation.
Practice Point 5.4.5: The decision on how to replace poorly performing uncuffed
nontunneled dialysis catheters should be individualized. The options include a new
venipuncture or, in select cases, a guidewire exchange of the existing dialysis catheter.
Practice Point 5.4.6: Do not perform routine or scheduled change of dialysis catheters
to reduce the risk of catheter-related infection.

R

Practice Point 5.4.7: In circumstances where prolonged indications for RRT are
anticipated, a cuffed tunneled catheter can be considered when initiating RRT for AKI,
particularly for children.

D

Practice Point 5.4.8: For patients who remain dialysis dependent with low probability of
resolution of AKI or patients being prepared for hospital discharge, transition to a
cuffed tunneled catheter should be undertaken.
5.5. Anticoagulation for RRT
Recommendation 5.5.1: Where available, we recommend using regional citrate
anticoagulation rather than heparin in children and adults receiving CRRT who do not
have contraindications to citrate (1B).
Practice Point 5.5.1: Unfractionated heparin, epoprostenol, or nafamostat mesylate are
acceptable alternatives to regional citrate anticoagulation for children and adults
receiving CRRT if citrate is contraindicated or not available.

26

Practice Point 5.5.2: The addition of regional citrate anticoagulation to systematic
anticoagulation can be appropriate for children and adults with hypercoagulable states
receiving CRRT.
Practice Point 5.5.3: Unfractionated or low-molecular-weight heparin should be
considered for children and adults receiving intermittent hemodialysis (IHD) or PIRRT
without increased bleeding when not already receiving systematic anticoagulation.
Practice Point 5.5.4: Anticoagulation with argatroban, danaparoid, or bivalirudin,
rather than other non-heparin anticoagulants, should be used in adults receiving RRT
with acute heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) who require systemic
anticoagulation.

AF
T

Practice Point 5.5.5 Regional citrate anticoagulation rather than heparin or nonheparin anticoagulants is preferable in adults receiving RRT with subacute (HIT-A,
HIT-B) or remote HIT, who are not receiving systemic anticoagulation and require
anticoagulation to prevent clotting of the dialysis circuit.
5.6 Hemofilters for RRT
Practice Point 5.6.1: Biocompatible membrane hemofilters and dialyzers should be used
in children and adults with AKI undergoing CRRT or IHD.

R

Practice Point 5.6.2: Non-pharmacologic strategies that may be used to maintain and
maximize circuit/hemofilter lifespan include optimizing catheter position in the right
atrium, use of predilution hemofiltration, and continuous venovenous hemodialysis
(CVVHD) or hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF) rather than continuous venovenous
hemofiltration (CVVH).

D

Practice Point 5.6.3: Where regional citrate or systemic heparin anticoagulation are
contraindicated or not available, priming of the CRRT circuit/filter with a solution
containing unfractionated heparin (UFH) may be used to increase circuit/hemofilter
lifespan.
5.7. Replacement and dialysate solutions for RRT
Practice Point 5.7.1: Use bicarbonate, rather than lactate, as a buffer in dialysate and
replacement fluid for CRRT in adults with AKI in the following scenarios: circulatory
shock, liver failure or lactic acidemia.
Practice Point 5.7.2: CRRT dialysate and replacement solutions should be sterile.
Dialysate and replacement solutions for IRRT should comply with American
Association of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI) standards regarding contamination
with bacteria and endotoxins.
27

Practice Point 5.7.3: Locally compounded dialysate and replacement CRRT solutions
should be prepared using standard quality control processes or commercially available
dialysate and replacement CRRT solutions should be used to allow flexibility in
achieving various goals of plasma electrolyte compositions to address most clinical
circumstances.
Practice Point 5.7.4: Base the choice of dialysate and replacement CRRT solutions with
specific compositions upon the goals for serum electrolyte and acid–base parameters.
The use of dialysate and replacement solutions should be individualized and reassessed
at frequent intervals depending upon the clinical condition of the patient to ensure that
they are appropriate.

AF
T

5.8. Ultrafiltration in RRT
Practice Point 5.8.1: The target ultrafiltration should be prescribed daily for CRRT and
prior to each IRRT session and be frequently monitored.
Practice Point 5.8.2: The prescribed intensity of ultrafiltration (e.g., timing and rate of
removal) should be individualized and consider patient characteristics, clinical context,
and phase of illness.

R

5.9 Discontinuation of RRT
Practice Point 5.9.1: Discontinue RRT when it is no longer needed either because of
evidence of resolution of AKI to the point that kidney function is adequate to meet the
patient’s metabolic and fluid balance demands or because RRT is no longer consistent
with the patient’s preferences for care.

D

Practice Point 5.9.2: Clinical and metabolic parameters, interdialytic SCr changes,
urine output, fluid balance, other parameters of resolution of AKI, and residual kidney
function can be used to guide decision-making for RRT discontinuation.
Practice Point 5.9.3: Urine output >450 ml/24 hours without exposure to diuretics or
>2300 ml/24 hours with exposure to diuretics and 2-hour timed creatinine clearance
≥23 ml/min can be used to predict successful RRT discontinuation in adults.
Practice Point 5.9.4: Use of diuretic therapy prior to and following RRT discontinuation
can be used to augment urine output and manage fluid balance but has not been proven
to facilitate resolution of AKI.

28

AF
T

5.10 Quality assurance for RRT
Practice Point 5.10.1: RRT programs should include the following quality standards to
reduce unnecessary variation, facilitate adoption of evidence-based practices, and
support opportunities for continuous quality improvement:
• Dedicated leadership, ideally with a medical (physician) and nursing dyad
partnership.
• Certified training and continuous education of all healthcare professionals
prescribing and delivering acute RRT.
• Standardized order sets for the acute prescription of RRT, including decisionsupport for dose-intensity of solute clearance, ultrafiltration for fluid removal, and
anticoagulation strategy.
• Standardized charting for RRT for both conventional and electronic health
records, inclusive of parameters of patient and machine solute clearance and fluid
balance.
• Monitoring and reporting of quality and key performance measures of RRT
Practice Point 5.10.2: Key quality performance measures of RRT include measures of
effective treatment time (i.e., downtime), filter lifespan, prescribed-to-delivered doseintensity, and ultrafiltration.
5.11 RRT with extracorporeal life support (ECLS)
Practice Point 5.11.1: Strategies for integration of RRT into existing circuits in patients
receiving extracorporeal life support (ECLS) depend on clinical context, local expertise,
and available technology and resources.

R

Practice Point 5.11.2: Most patients receiving ECLS have concomitant hemodynamic
instability. For these patients, initial support with CRRT rather than IRRT may be
preferential.

D

Practice Point 5.11.3: Fluid accumulation that is refractory to medical therapy
independent of kidney function may be a reasonable indication for RRT in patients
receiving ECLS.
5.12. Considerations specific for children
5.12.1 Starting renal replacement therapy (RRT)
Practice Point 5.12.1.1: In critically ill children with severe AKI, RRT initiation within
2 days of intensive care unit (ICU) admission or AKI onset should be considered as it
may be associated with improved outcome.
Practice Point 5.12.1.2: In critically ill children, isolated fluid overload can be an
indication for RRT initiation.
29

5.12.2. RRT modality
Practice Point 5.12.2.1: Acute PD is an acceptable RRT modality and may be preferable
to CRRT for children in select circumstances.
5.12.3. RRT dose-intensity
Practice Point 5.12.3.1: An initial CRRT effluent volume for children can be 25–30
ml/kg/h. Thereafter, dose-intensity can be adjusted based on the adequacy of correction
of electrolyte, acid-base, and metabolic derangements.
Practice Point 5.12.3.2: The dose-intensity prescription in children receiving CRRT
should be weight-based (ml/kg/h), according to either body weight at hospital or ICU
admission or ideal body weight and not prescribed based on body surface area.

AF
T

Practice Point 5.12.3.3: In children with AKI, PD can be initiated with a fill volume of
10–20 ml/kg and short cycle times (60–90 minutes), with gradual increases in volume
and dwell time as tolerated, with continuous therapy over 24 hours for the first 1–3
days to achieve solute clearance and fluid balance goals.
Practice Point 5.12.3.4: Augmentation of initial RRT dose-intensity for CRRT is
warranted when treating children with hyperammonemia. CRRT dose-intensity up to
200 ml/kg/h may be acceptable to achieve adequate clearance of ammonia. Children
should be appropriately monitored for unintended solute losses during periods of
augmented CRRT dose-intensity.

D

R

5.12.4. Catheters for RRT
Practice Point 5.12.4.1: In small children, including neonates with small vessel size, use
of a pliable cuffed catheter, as compared to a rigid temporary catheter, may be less
thrombogenic and preferred, even when the expected dialysis duration is uncertain.
The cuff can be left outside the body when the projected duration of use is short.
5.12.5. Anticoagulation for RRT
Practice Point 5.12.5.1: In children requiring small catheters and circuit volume and
lower blood flow rates, anticoagulation is often necessary and preferred over no
anticoagulation during CRRT.
5.12.6. Hemofilters for RRT
Practice Point 5.12.6.1: Appropriately sized membranes proportional to body surface
area are preferred for children with AKI receiving CRRT or IRRT.

30

5.12.7. Ultrafiltration in RRT
Practice Point 5.12.7.1: In children, net ultrafiltration (UFNET) should not exceed 2.5
ml/kg/h. Frequent assessment of fluid balance (i.e., every 4-6 hours) should be
undertaken to evaluate tolerance for fluid removal and adjust fluid balance goals, as
necessary.

D

R

AF
T

5.12.8. Discontinuation of RRT
Practice Point 5.12.8.1: Urine output exceeding >0.5 ml/kg/h over 6 hours can indicate
resolution of AKI and be used to predict successful RRT discontinuation in children.

31

CHAPTER 6. FOLLOW-UP CARE AFTER AKI OR AKD
6.1 Planning follow-up care with people after AKI and/or AKD
Recommendation 6.1.1: We recommend coordinated follow-up for children and adults
after AKI and/or AKD, with personalized care according to individual clinical context
and vulnerability risks (1B).

AF
T

Practice Point 6.1.1: Transition of care from hospital to home requires clear
communication between inpatient and outpatient care teams, an identified healthcare
professional for AKI follow-up, and resources for patient engagement and education
about their kidney health and kidney health protection.
Practice Point 6.1.2: Provide discharge summaries for children and adults with AKI
that include details of the AKI episode, status of the resolution of AKI, medication
management, and follow-up plans with recommendations.
Practice Point 6.1.3: A comprehensive clinical assessment of children and adults
following an episode of illness affected by AKI/AKD includes assessment of blood
pressure (BP) and volume status, medication reconciliation/review, and kidney function
and albuminuria after hospital discharge.

R

Practice Point 6.1.4: Provide children and adults (and their caregivers) with a history of
AKI and/or AKD access to education about kidney health, sick day guidance and
kidney care, and psychosocial support to enhance functional status and quality of life.

D

Recommendation 6.1.2: We suggest risk stratification of AKI survivors at hospital
discharge using a validated tool to identify children and adults at high risk of CKD who
may benefit from nephrology care after AKI (2D).
6.2. Medication management following AKI and/or AKD
Recommendation 6.2.1: We recommend starting or resuming RASi in adults, unless
there is a contraindication, in accordance with evidence-based guideline indications
(adults: 1B; children: 1D).
Practice Point 6.2.1: Evaluate the clinical indication for starting or resuming sodiumglucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors (SGLT2i), glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists
(GLP-1 RA) and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRA) in children and adults.
Practice Point 6.2.2: Assess the appropriateness of starting or resuming guidelineindicated medications at hospital discharge and by 3 months after AKI/AKD.
xxxii

Practice Point 6.2.3: Monitor RASi, MRA, or diuretic prescription and management
following AKI/AKD in accordance with the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline
for the Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease.
6.3 Evaluation for CKD
Practice Point 6.3.1: Assess kidney function and markers of kidney damage 3 months
after AKI or AKD to evaluate for resolution, and new onset or worsening of preexisting
CKD.

AF
T

Practice Point 6.3.2: Serum cystatin C-based GFR estimation can be used to assess for
CKD in children and adults after AKI in clinical situations where SCr is less accurate.
6.4 Post-discharge care for children and adults receiving RRT following AKI in the
outpatient setting
Practice Point 6.4.1: RRT programs should incorporate comprehensive dialysis care
and communication plans for children and adults receiving RRT following AKI tailored
to their likelihood of dialysis liberation.
Practice Point 6.4.2: Engage patients, caregivers, and outpatient dialysis care teams in
the development of a post-discharge care plan prior to transition from the hospital to
community settings.

D

R

Practice Point 6.4.3: Dialysis care for children and adults receiving RRT following AKI
requires clinical assessment of volume status, laboratory evaluation for evidence of
kidney recovery, medication review and reconciliation, and patient education about
identification of return of kidney function and minimizing kidney injury during the
resolution phase.
Practice Point 6.4.4: Provide education and engage adults, children, and caregivers in
shared decision-making focused around self-care, short- and long-term risks of
permanent RRT and mortality, quality of life, and goals of care to inform decisions
around dialysis care.
Practice Point 6.4.5: Upon discontinuation of outpatient dialysis, a nephrologist should
conduct a comprehensive assessment within 7 days, followed by an additional
evaluation of kidney function at 90 days.

xxxiii

6.5. Considerations specific to children
6.5.1 Planning follow-up care for children after AKI and/or AKD
Practice Point 6.5.1.1: Assess children following AKI for global functional status at
hospital discharge and for growth parameters and functional status at outpatient
follow-up.
Practice Point 6.5.1.2: In children previously taking RASi, these medications should be
resumed with resolution of AKI and/or AKD, unless there is a contraindication.

AF
T

6.5.2. Post-discharge care for children receiving RRT following AKI in the outpatient
setting
Practice Point 6.5.2.1: A risk-based approach guided by cause and severity of AKI and
kidney health assessments at hospital discharge and one year following an AKI episode
can be used to determine need for future nephrology follow-up in children.

D

R

Practice Point 6.5.2.2: Children recovering from AKI treated with RRT require
individualized follow-up that includes age-appropriate functional and developmental
assessments, growth and neurodevelopmental surveillance, and integrated care across
nephrology, primary care, and relevant subspecialties.

xxxiv

CHAPTER 1. AKI AND AKD DEFINITION, IDENTIFICATION,
AND CLASSIFICATION

AF
T

The definition of acute kidney impairment has evolved from a fragmented landscape
of disparate terms into a unified framework of Acute Kidney Injury (AKI) and Acute Kidney
Disease (AKD). While the field has relied on serum creatinine (SCr) and urine output since
the standardization efforts of 2009, the shift toward consistent Kidney Disease: Improving
Global Outcomes (KDIGO)-based staging has been instrumental in improving global
epidemiological tracking and clinical risk stratification. However, as SCr often serves as a
trailing marker of kinetic change, the current frontier of nephrology emphasizes integrating
novel biomarkers and updated evidence to identify kidney stress earlier. This chapter
explores the transition from these traditional functional markers to a modern, precision-based
approach to diagnosis and classification.
1.1. Definition of AKI
Practice Point 1.1.1: Acute kidney injury (AKI) in children and adults is defined by the
presence of one or more abnormalities of kidney function or structure known or
presumed to have occurred within 7 days, in the appropriate clinical context (Table 1).

R

Table 1 | Criteria for acute kidney injury for children and adults (any one or more of the
following within the corresponding time period)
Functional criteria
Structural criteria
• Increase in SCr by ≥0.3 mg/dl (≥26.5 µmol/l) • Elevation of a biomarker of kidney damage
within 48 hours
when used for its clinically validated and
regulatory qualified indication, which is
• Increase in SCr by ≥1.5 times baseline that is known or presumed to have occurred within
known or presumed to have occurred within
the prior 7 days
the prior 7 days

D

• Increase in serum cystatin C by ≥1.5 times
baseline that is known or presumed to have
occurred within the prior 7 days

• Mean urine volume of less than 0.5 ml/kg/h
(based on ideal body weight) for ≥6 hours
SCr, serum creatinine

The KDIGO 2012 Clinical Practice Guideline for Acute Kidney Injury provided a
definition for AKI based on changes in SCr and urine output that are associated with the risks
of death and receipt of renal replacement therapy (RRT) in hospitalized patients.1 SCr and
urine output are markers of kidney function, specifically glomerular filtration rate (GFR).
Both measures are widely used in routine clinical practice and can be obtained at relatively
low cost. However, neither measure is entirely sensitive or specific to GFR and can lead to
misclassification of AKI (Table 2).

35

R

AF
T

Table 2 | Limitations of SCr and urine output for the diagnosis of AKI
Traditional biomarker
Impact on AKI diagnosis
SCr concentration
Delayed diagnosis
• Insensitive to kidney damage; nearly
50% of function must be lost before SCr
increases
• Slow to increase following an insult (24- Delayed diagnosis
48 hours)
Delayed/missed diagnosis
• Affected by liver function
Delayed/missed diagnosis
• Affected by muscle mass and
metabolism
Erroneous diagnosis
• Affected by creatine intake
Erroneous diagnosis
• Small increases can occur due to
physiological and analytic variability,
particularly with low baseline glomerular
filtration rate (e.g., CKD)
Erroneous diagnosis of AKI
• Increases without true reduction in
glomerular filtration rate in the setting of
o Hemoconcentration following
diuresis
o Inhibition of tubular secretion
(e.g. medications like
trimethoprim and cimetidine)
• Physiological decrease during pregnancy Delayed/missed diagnosis of AKI
Physiological hemodynamic adjustment
• Increases in context of nephroprotective
misinterpreted as AKI
medications (i.e., RASi, SGLT2i)
Urine output
Missed diagnosis
• Dependent on accurate measurement
Delayed/missed diagnosis
• Can be manipulated by diuretics
Erroneous diagnosis
• Oliguria may be physiological
AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidney disease; RASi, renin-angiotensin inhibitors; SCr,
serum creatinine; SGLT2i, sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitor

D

The development and validation of several novel biomarkers over the last decade has
enabled earlier detection of kidney cellular stress, damage, or inflammation compared with
the use of functional markers alone, thus enabling earlier intervention and potentially
improving outcomes.2 Further, alternative functional biomarkers (i.e., serum cystatin C) are
now available that overcome some of the limitations of SCr. For instance, cystatin C is not
confounded by muscle mass. However, these markers have their own limitations, as well
(Recommendation 1.1.1).
The updated definition adds new criteria for the purpose of AKI detection based on
abnormalities of kidney structure, which reflect cellular stress, damage, or inflammation that
may occur in the presence or absence of reduced kidney function. These new structural
criteria for AKI are intended to encompass a number of urine or serum biomarkers that have
received regulatory qualification for use in specific clinical settings based in part on their
ability to predict the development of AKI before functional criteria are met (Table 3 and 4).

36

These biomarkers may become elevated before an increase in SCr or reduction in
urine output occurs; a state that has previously been termed “subclinical AKI”. Examples of
these biomarkers include urinary tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 (TIMP-2), insulinlike growth factor binding protein 7 (IGFBP7), neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipoprotein
(NGAL), kidney injury molecule‑1 (KIM-1), and liver-type fatty acid-binding protein (LFABP).

AF
T

A common method of categorizing kidney biomarkers is to stratify them based on
their characteristics. Thus, some biomarkers primarily reflect glomerular filtration (i.e. serum
cystatin C) whereas others represent tubular cell stress (i.e., IGFBP7 and TIMP-2) or tubular
cell damage [i.e. NGAL, KIM-1, NAG, L-FABP]. Prolonged and increased expression of
TIMP-2 and IGFBP7 may be synonymous with cell damage. Other kidney biomarkers
indicate intrarenal inflammation (i.e. IL-18, IL-9, CCL14).
All biomarkers have specific characteristics, are released in response to particular
triggers and have unique kinetic profiles, including half-life and time to peak value (Table 4).
Many are elevated in AKI but also confounded by different medical conditions or
interventions. Importantly, several studies in the literature used different cut-offs to
distinguish between “biomarker-positive” versus “biomarker-negative” conditions, which
explains some of the differences in performance but also makes direct comparisons between
studies challenging.

R

It is important to keep these aspects in mind when measuring and interpreting
biomarker values in specific patient cohorts. When deciding whether to integrate a biomarker
into routine monitoring or to include a biomarker in the diagnostic work-up of a specific
clinical setting, it is essential to select one that is physiologically and biologically relevant to
the question of interest. Further, timing of measurement needs to be guided by the kinetic
profile of the biomarker.

D

The availability and higher costs of new biomarker tests limit their use in many
settings but it is possible that earlier detection of AKI may ultimately offset these costs due to
lower resource utilization and healthcare spending.

37

AF
T

Table 3 | Select kidney biomarkers and reported clinical applications
Damage/stress
Outcome
Clinical application
biomarker
Urinary [TIMP-2] *
Stage 2 or 3 AKI in
Cardiac surgery:
[IGFBP7]3
critically ill patients
PrevAKI RCT4: Application of a kidney care protocol to patients with elevated urinary [TIMP2]*[IGFBP7] concentrations after cardiac surgery was associated with reduced incidence of AKI as
defined by SCr criteria.
PrevAKI-Multicenter RCT2: Application of a kidney care protocol to patients with elevated urinary
[TIMP-2]*[IGFBP7] concentrations after cardiac surgery was associated with a reduced incidence of
Stage 2–3 AKI as defined by SCr criteria.

Urinary NGAL7

AKI

Risk scores of
granular/muddy
brown casts

Systematic review and meta-analysis of 52 observational studies involving 13,040 patients reporting the
performance of plasma and urinary NGAL concentrations in the setting of cardiac surgery, intensive care,
or emergency department care showed that the AUCs for urinary NGAL were 0.74; 95% CI: 0.69–0.79,
0.73; 95% CI: 0.64–0.82, and 0.74; 95% CI: 0.66–0.82 for prediction of AKI, Stage 2–3 AKI, and AKI
treated with RRT, respectively.9
Among 197 patients with AKI, 79 experienced worsening of AKI from the time of nephrology
consultation. The urinary sediment score predicted worsening of AKI due to acute tubular necrosis versus
prerenal AKI during hospitalization.10

D
R

Any AKI

Major non-cardiac and cardiac surgery:
BigpAK RCT5, 6: Application of a kidney care protocol to patients with elevated urinary [TIMP2]*[IGFBP7] concentrations after major non-cardiac surgery was associated with a reduced incidence of
Stage 2–3 AKI as defined by SCr criteria.
A multicenter pooled analysis of prospective studies of patients with elevated urinary NGAL
concentrations but not diagnosed as AKI by SCr (NGAL positive and SCr negative) showed worse
outcomes such as dialysis requirement and in-hospital mortality compared with patients without elevated
NGAL results and diagnosed as AKI by SCr (NGAL negative and SCr positive). 8

AKI

Urine microscopy score was correlated with higher urine NGAL values and predictive of worsening AKI,
both in sepsis-associated and non-associated AKI.11
AKI, acute kidney injury; AKI-D, acute kidney injury requiring dialysis; AUC, area under curve; BigpAK, Biomarker-guided intervention to prevent Acute
Kidney Injury; IGFBP7, insulin-like growth factor binding protein 7; NGAL, neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipoprotein; PrevAKI, Prevention of Cardiac
Surgery–Associated Acute Kidney Injury; RCT, randomized controlled trial; SCr, serum creatinine; TIMP-2, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2
38

Table 4 | Description and characteristics of select AKI biomarkers as of November 2025
Characteristics

Functional biomarkers
13 kDa cysteine
protease inhibitor
produced by
nucleated human
cells; freely filtered
Cystatin C
and completely
reabsorbed and
catabolized in
healthy kidney
tubular epithelial
cells

Plasma

Plasma

Intended
use

Population/
settings
studied

Stress biomarkers
Tissue
Proteins released by
metalloproteinasetubular epithelial
2 (TIMP-2);
cells (TIMP-2 distal
Insulin-like
tubule, IGFBP7
growth factor
proximal tubule) that
binding protein 7
can induce cell cycle
(IGFB7)
arrest

Urine

Half-life

Limitations/
confounders

Diagnosis
of AKI and
marker of
severity

Diagnosis
and
assessment
of AKI
severity
and kidney
recovery

Prediction
and
diagnosis
of AKI and
assessment
of severity

Regulatory
approval

ICU; liver
transplantati
on;
hospitalized
patients

1.5–2 hours

12–24 hours

Elevated in
CKD;
confounded by
age, sex,
inflammatory
state, diabetes,
low albumin,
glucocorticoids

Hospitalized
patients

Exact halflife not
known;
stable in
blood up to
48 hours

Peak level at
~24 hours after
kidney insult

Elevated in
CKD; may be
less sensitive
than SCr or
serum cystatin C

CE-marked for
clinical use for
kidney function
assessment

4–5 hours

Significant
decline in
performance if
measured
beyond 12 hours
after an AKI
event

U.S. FDA and
CE-marked for
predicting Stage
2 or 3 AKI in
adults

D
R

Proenkephalin A

Endogenous
polypeptide
hormone in adrenal
medulla, immune
system, and kidney
tissue; freely filtered

Biological
sample

AF
T

AKI biomarker

Time to
diagnostic
value (i.e.,
timing of
measurement)

Exact halflife not
known

ICU

Damage biomarkers
39

U.S. FDA
approved and
CE-marked for
GFR estimation
in clinical
practice

Characteristics

Alanine
aminopeptidase
(AAP);
γ-glutamyl
transpeptidase
(γ-GT);
Alkaline
phosphatase
(ALP)

Enzymes located in
several organs,
including the brush
border of proximal
tubular cells

C-C motif
chemokine ligand
14
(CCL 14)

Pro-inflammatory
chemokine
implicated in tissue
injury and repair
processes; primarily
produced by
macrophages and
monocytes; has a
role in activating
monocytes,
recruiting immune
cells to sites of
injury / infection and
in regulating
inflammation in

Urine

Urine

Intended
use
Risk
assessment
and
prediction
of AKI

Cardiac
surgery

Diagnosis
and
severity of
AKI

ICU

D
R

Dickkopf-3
(DKK3)

38kDa kidney
tubular cell–derived
glycoprotein;
secreted into urine
under tubular stress
conditions

Biological
sample

Urine

Half-life

Time to
diagnostic
value (i.e.,
timing of
measurement)

Limitations/
confounders

Regulatory
approval

Variable
half-life
depending
on clinical
context

12–48 hours
after the insult,
depending on
the type of
kidney injury

Elevated in
CKD

Not applicable

Unknown

Within hours of
kidney insult
but varies
depending on
type of insult

Elevated in UTI,
cardiovascular
disease, stroke

Not applicable

Within 36 hours
of AKI onset

Confounded by
comorbid
conditions,
including cancer
and
inflammation

CE-approved in
Europe to
predict
persistent severe
acute kidney
injury

AF
T

AKI biomarker

Population/
settings
studied

Persistence
of severe
AKI

ICU

Not known

40

AKI biomarker

Characteristics

Biological
sample

Intended
use

Population/
settings
studied

Half-life

Time to
diagnostic
value (i.e.,
timing of
measurement)

Limitations/
confounders

Regulatory
approval

Not applicable

Not applicable

various organ
systems

Plasma

Unknown

Within 12–24
hours of kidney
insult

Short halflife
(several
minutes)

Variable; 4–12
hours after
kidney insult
depending on
type of kidney
insult

Decreased in
anemia and
increased in
inflammatory
state

AF
T

Hepatocyte
growth factor
(HGF)

Antifibrotic cytokine
produced by
mesenchymal cells;
involved in tubular
cell regeneration
after AKI and
measured in plasma

Urine,
plasma

Diagnosis
of AKI

ICU

D
R

Chitinase 3-like
protein 1

39 kDa intracellular
protein of glycoside
hydrolase family;
expressed by
endothelial cells,
macrophages &
neutrophils and
released into the
urine and plasma

Limited
performance in
real-world
settings as a
single
biomarker;
expression is
strongly
upregulated by
various
inflammatory
and
immunological
diseases,
including
several cancers
and
atherosclerosis

Severity of
AKI and
kidney
recovery

Hospitalized

41

Hepcidin

2.78 kDa peptide
hormone
predominantly
produced in
hepatocytes; freely
filtered into urine
and plasma

Interleukin-18
(IL-18)

18 kDa proinflammatory
cytokine; released
into urine following
tubular cell damage

Interleukin-9
(IL‑9)

30-40kDa
pleiotropic cytokine
secreted by CD4+
helper cells

Kidney injury
molecule–1
(KIM-1)

Liver-type fatty
acid-binding
protein (L-FABP)

Biological
sample

Urine,
plasma

Urine

Urine

Intended
use

Transmembrane
glycoprotein
produced by
proximal tubular
cell; released into
urine after tubular
cell damage

14 kDa intracellular
lipid chaperone;
freely filtered and
reabsorbed in
proximal tubule;

Urine

Urine;
plasma

Half-life

Time to
diagnostic
value (i.e.,
timing of
measurement)

Limitations/
confounders

Regulatory
approval

Short halflife
(several
minutes)

Variable; 4–12
hours after
kidney insult
depending on
type of kidney
insult

Decreased in
anemia and
increased in
inflammatory
state

Not applicable

Elevated in
inflammatory
states

Not approved as
AKI biomarker

Diagnosis
of AKI and
assessment
of severity

ICU

Prediction
and
diagnosis
of AKI

Hospitalized
patients;
patients in
the
emergency
department

16 hours

Rise within 4–6
hours of kidney
insult; peak at
12 hours

Differential
diagnosis
of AKI

Acute
interstitial
nephritis

Short halflife (few
hours)

Prolonged time;
not a marker of
early AKI

AF
T

Characteristics

D
R

AKI biomarker

Population/
settings
studied

Prediction
and
diagnosis
of AKI and
assessment
of severity

Hospitalized
patients;
patients in
the
emergency
department

Diagnosis
of AKI

ICU,
patients in
the
emergency
department
42

Varies with
severity of
kidney
injury and
other
factors,
including
sepsis
~75 hours

12–24 hours
after kidney
insult

4–6 hours after
kidney insult

Indicator of
chronic changes;
not indicator of
early AKI
Mixed
performance in
chronic
diseases,
including
immune
diseases and
cancer
Associated with
anemia in
people without
diabetes

Not approved as
AKI biomarker
FDA and EMA
approved for
preclinical drug
development
and monitoring
of drug-induced
kidney injury
Approved for
clinical use in
Japan to
measure tubular
injury and

Characteristics

Biological
sample

excreted into urine
after tubular cell
damage and
measured in the
urine and plasma
>130 kDa lysosomal
enzyme; released
into urine after
tubular damage

Neutrophil
gelatinaseassociated
lipocalin (NGAL)

≥3 different types
measured in the
urine and plasma:
i.monomeric 25kDa
glycoprotein
produced by
neutrophils and
epithelial tissues,
including tubular
cells
ii.homodimeric
45kDa protein
produced by
neutrophils
iii.heterodimeric
135kDa protein

Urine

Diagnosis
of AKI

Hospitalized
patients

D
R

N-acetyl-β-Dglucosaminidase
(NAG)

Intended
use

Urine;
plasma

Half-life

Time to
diagnostic
value (i.e.,
timing of
measurement)

Limitations/
confounders

AF
T

AKI biomarker

Population/
settings
studied

Diagnosis
of AKI and
measureme
nt of
severity

Hospitalized
patients;
patients in
the
emergency
department

43

Intracellula
r half-life:
6 days;
Half-life in
urine: Not
known

10–20
minutes

Regulatory
approval
predict kidney
disease
progression

2–6 hours after
kidney insult

Elevated in
diabetes and
albuminuria

Component of
biomarker panel
FDA qualitied
for monitoring
drug-induced
kidney injury in
early-phase
clinical trials

2-4 hours after
kidney insult

Elevated in
sepsis, UTI,
CKD;
measurement of
general
inflammation

FDA approved
for identifying
pediatric
patients at risk
of moderate-tosevere AKI

AKI biomarker

Characteristics

Biological
sample

Intended
use

Population/
settings
studied

Half-life

Time to
diagnostic
value (i.e.,
timing of
measurement)

Limitations/
confounders

Regulatory
approval

D
R

AF
T

produced by
tubular cells
AIN, acute interstitial nephritis; AKI, acute kidney injury; CE, European Conformity; CKD, chronic kidney disease; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; ICU,
intensive care unit; RRT, renal replacement therapy; SCr, serum creatinine; U.S., United States; UTI, urinary tract infection

44

Recommendation 1.1.1: We suggest using serum cystatin C to identify AKI in children
and adults in clinical situations when serum creatinine (SCr) is less accurate (2B).
This recommendation puts a high value on the greater sensitivity of cystatin C for detecting
AKI in specific patient populations where changes in SCr can be insensitive. The
recommendation places a lower value on resource use and additional costs. The feasibility of
implementing this recommendation is highly dependent on the availability and turnaround
time for cystatin C measurement.

AF
T

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Previous AKI criteria using SCr and urine output measurements were established
based on risks of kidney failure and mortality.1, 12 Cystatin C is an alternative endogenous
filtration marker that provides a more accurate GFR estimate than SCr in some specific
populations. In a study of 38 mechanically ventilated adults in the intensive care unit (ICU),
longer ICU stay was associated with greater differences between GFR estimated by serum
cystatin C and SCr, suggesting that SCr can systematically overestimate GFR after prolonged
critical illness.13 A recent modeling study found that serum cystatin C can achieve steadystate concentration and meet AKI diagnostic thresholds significantly faster than SCr, with an
advantage of 6–48 hours, depending on chronic kidney disease (CKD) severity. Serum
cystatin C had greater sensitivity in detecting GFR reductions, with the ability to detect AKI
within 12–24 hours after an insult, compared with 12–72 hours for SCr.14

D

R

Several meta-analyses have evaluated the diagnostic performance of cystatin C for
early AKI identification. A meta-analysis by Lan et al. included 4 diagnostic accuracy
studies that evaluated the performance of serum cystatin C, most often measured within 6–12
hours of major surgery in adults, using a reference standard of later development of AKI
defined by Risk, Injury, Failure, Loss of kidney function, and End-stage kidney disease
(RIFLE), Acute Kidney Injury Network (AKIN), or the KDIGO 2012 AKI criteria
(Supplementary Tables S5).15 Serum cystatin C exhibited relatively high discrimination with
an area under the receiver-operating characteristics curve (AUROC) of 0.82 (95% confidence
interval [CI]: 0.78–0.85). In an accompanying network meta-analysis, serum cystatin C
exhibited the best discrimination and had the greatest specificity for early AKI detection
among the 7 biomarkers included in the analysis.15 Evidence review of 16 pediatric studies
found that serum cystatin C had moderate accuracy to predict incident AKI (AUC 0.80) and
moderate or severe AKI (AUC 0.83) in children (Supplementary Table S6).16
Certainty of evidence
In adults, there is moderate certainty of evidence that serum cystatin C has
“moderate” accuracy as an early predictor of post-major surgery AKI, defined as an AUROC
curve of between 0.75 and 0.85. The certainty of evidence was downgraded for some
methodological limitations of the studies.
45

In children, there is moderate certainty of evidence that serum cystatin C has
“moderate” accuracy as an early predictor of incident AKI and Stage 2–3 AKI, defined as an
AUROC of between 0.75 and 0.85. The certainty of evidence was downgraded for some
methodological limitations of the studies, in addition to imprecision of the accuracy of Stage
2–3 AKI.

AF
T

Values and preferences
This recommendation places a high value on the need for accurate and timely
detection of a decline in GFR. The Work Group judged that healthcare professionals and
most people at risk for AKI would prefer to use a more accurate test enabling earlier
identification of AKI in situations where changes in SCr are insensitive or nonspecific.
However, these benefits need to be balanced against the additional consequences and costs
associated with cystatin C testing. The Work Group therefore prioritized reserving use of
cystatin C for AKI detection to the clinical situations provided in Table 5 where more
accurate measurement may alter clinical decisions.

R

Resource use and costs
Costs incurred for the higher frequency of cystatin C testing include one-time costs
associated with initiation of the assay within a laboratory including building the information
technology infrastructure and method verification studies; and continuous costs associated
with consumables and maintaining the assay. If cystatin C is performed in an outside
laboratory, other costs may ensue as with any laboratory test. Additional costs may also
result from increased referrals to nephrologists to assist in interpretation of potentially
discordant results between SCr and cystatin C results. Ideally, these costs would decrease
over time with increased utilization and familiarity with the properties of the test.

D

Considerations for implementation
Implementation of this recommendation requires cystatin C testing be available in
acute care centers with results available in a timely manner. Guidance to clinical laboratories
on implementation and laboratory standards for cystatin C testing is provided in the KDIGO
2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for CKD (Practice Points 1.2.3.1 and 1.2.3.2).17 Due to the
increased costs of cystatin C testing, clear indications for testing with cystatin C in addition
to SCr should be developed within institutions and SCr should remain the primary laboratory
tests for AKI identification in the majority of patients. Education for healthcare professionals,
caregivers, and people with AKI for optimal use and interpretation of cystatin C results is
required.
Rationale
Changes in SCr may be insensitive for detection of AKI in acute and chronic illnesses
that affect liver function and muscle mass (Table 2). In these scenarios, serum cystatin C may
offer greater accuracy than SCr for early detection of AKI and opportunities for intervention.
46

Potential harms include false positive test results, overdiagnosis, and the increased health
care costs associated with the test itself as well as follow-up testing. In addition, discordant
results between SCr and cystatin C may lead to increased nephrology consultations.
Obtaining cystatin C results may take longer than SCr result depending on the local
laboratory infrastructure and processes, which may lead to delays in recognition and offset
the benefits of its use if results are not reported in a timely manner. Table 5 outlines specific
situations where cystatin C measurement may be preferable to SCr to detect reduced GFR.

AF
T

Table 5. Specific situations where serum cystatin C measurement may be preferable to SCr to
detect reduced GFR
Domain
Specific clinical condition
Changes in muscle mass Muscle wasting after prolonged illness
Neurological diseases (e.g., muscle dystrophy)
Spinal cord injury, paraplegia/quadriplegia
Above knee amputation
Extreme sport/exercise
Eating disorders
Diet
Low-protein diet
Vegetarian
High protein diets and creatine supplementation
Medications
Drugs that interfere with tubular secretion of creatinine (e.g.,
cimetidine, trimethoprim)
GFR, glomerular filtration rate; SCr, serum creatinine

Practice Point 1.1.2: A baseline SCr value should be ascertained for all patients with
suspected or confirmed AKI.

D

R

The KDIGO SCr criteria for AKI are based on an increase from a baseline value
known or presumed to have occurred over a short time frame. Identification of an accurate
baseline value is therefore required to establish whether a specific SCr value represents a
change and whether the change is sufficient to meet AKI criteria. This is also needed for
staging the severity of AKI based on the magnitude of SCr increase and for ascertaining the
extent of recovery of GFR following AKI. A baseline SCr should be representative of a
patient’s GFR before the onset of AKI. In clinical practice, variation in the extent of SCr
testing for a patient will influence the selection of a representative SCr value as the baseline
value. Access to previous laboratory results obtained prior to an acute illness is helpful in
establishing an appropriate baseline. In their absence, several approaches have been
recommended in the literature including use of a SCr representative of normal GFR for a
patient’s age and sex, or the use of a subsequent lower SCr value when SCr values are
declining in the absence of RRT.

47

AF
T

Practice Point 1.1.3: In adults, select the baseline SCr or cystatin C for an AKI episode
using a hierarchical approach (Figure 1).

Figure 1 | Hierarchical approach to the selection of the baseline SCr value used to
characterize an AKI event in adults*. *A representative primary care/outpatient serum
creatinine (SCr) should ideally reflect the stable clinical state, and may be a mean, median, or
most recent value between 8–365 days before a hospital admission (or acute event). AKI,
acute kidney injury; Cys C, cystatin C; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; RRT,
renal replacement therapy

D

R

There are several different approaches described for ascertaining baseline SCr values
(Supplementary Tables S7 and S8). Therefore, we advise using a mean, median, or most
recent SCr measurement between 8–365 days prior to admission or acute event as the
preferred method to establish baseline kidney function representing a stable clinical state.
Differences in methods for establishing baseline SCr can affect whether patients meet AKI
criteria leading to both over- and underdiagnosis. Underdiagnosis of AKI can lead to delayed
recognition thereby delaying investigations and treatment. Overdiagnosis of AKI in people
with CKD may expose patients to unwarranted tests and interventions. In addition, use of
varying methods in epidemiological studies impacts the comparability of findings, limiting
interpretation of consistency of findings across different geographic regions and clinical
settings.
Access to outpatient SCr values may not be available in some settings. Wherever
possible, systems should ideally be integrated or if this is not possible, primary care and
outpatient values should be accessible to clinicians in secondary care settings, and vice versa.
Education of healthcare professionals is required to ensure optimum implementation of this
recommendation.

48

In the absence of an available outpatient SCr within the last year, we advise using SCr
on admission as the next option unless AKI is suspected on admission (e.g., communityacquired AKI). This provides a readily available value that is more appropriate for patients
admitted for elective procedures (e.g., surgery, imaging procedures) but may be affected by
conditions which have precipitated nonelective admission for conditions such as volume
depletion or sepsis. An alternative to this approach is the use of the minimum value during
admission including post-AKI values, allowing for retrospective AKI diagnosis. This
approach is less desirable due to the influence of fluctuations or interventions that might
lower SCr, such as fluid administration or withdrawal of medications that lower GFR and
would not be representative of the true baseline in patients who have not fully recovered
kidney function.

AF
T

In the absence of any available measurements, we advise back calculating, assuming
an estimated GFR (eGFR) of 75 ml/min per 1.73 m2 for adults, based on a validated eGFR
estimating equation is acceptable.18 Use of an equation with greater accuracy at higher eGFR,
such as the Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration Equation (CKD EPI)
equation, is preferable to equations that have been previously recommended such as the
Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) equation. However, assuming a baseline
GFR of 75 ml/min per 1.73 m2 for adults does not account for individual patient
characteristics and the presence of underlying CKD. Studies have shown that this method
leads to both over- and underestimation of AKI.19-24 Approaches specific to calculating a
baseline SCr in children are discussed in Practice Point 1.6.2.

R

For the purpose of epidemiological research, use the median of outpatient values 7–
365 days prior to admission or an acute event is advised. It is important to ensure that there is
a uniform approach to defining AKI for epidemiological studies, allowing for valid
comparisons between studies and for analyses of trends over time.

D

1.2. Staging of AKI
Practice Point 1.2.1: The severity of AKI in children and adults is staged according to
individual components or combinations of the following SCr and urine output criteria
and presence or absence of an elevated biomarker of kidney stress or damage (Table 6).

49

Table 6 | Severity staging system for AKI
Functional criteria
Serum creatinine
Stage

Criteria

C0

C1

C2

Structural criteria
Urine output

Stage

Criteria

U0
≥0.3 mg/dl (≥26.5
µmol/l) increase,
Or
1.5-1.9 times
baseline

U1

2–2.9 times baseline

U2

Damage biomarker
Stage

Criteria

B1

Positive

B0

Negative

B1

Positive

B0

Negative

B1

Positive

<0.5 ml/kg/h for 6–
12 hours

<0.5 ml/kg/h for
>12 hours

AF
T

≥3.0 times baseline,
Or
B0
Negative
Increase in SCr to
<0.3 ml/kg/h for
C3
≥4.0 mg/dl (≥353.6
U3
>24 hours or anuria
µmol/l)
for >12 hours
B1
Positive
Or
Initiation of RRT
*C1-C3 indicates acute kidney injury (AKI) severity stage according to serum creatinine (SCr)
criteria, U1-U3 indicates AKI severity stage according to urine output criteria, B0/B1 indicates
staging by absence or presence of an elevated damage biomarker. Relevant components of the staging
system can be employed to classify the severity of AKI according to the measurements collected for
an individual. RRT, renal replacement therapy

D

R

The KDIGO 2012 AKI staging system was based on SCr and urine output criteria
with the patient assigned a severity Stage (1–3) according to the highest (worst) SCr or urine
output stage. Subsequently, numerous large observational studies from intensive care settings
have shown poor agreement and varying prognosis between SCr and urine output criteria for
identifying and staging AKI (Supplementary Tables S9 and S10). Kellum et al. examined
outcomes of 32,045 patients from 8 adult ICUs in the U.S. with electronic records of SCr and
urine output measures and showed that, across the KDIGO 2012 AKI stages based on SCr,
higher stages of urine output criteria were generally associated with higher risks of both
hospital mortality and RRT.25 A subsequent study restricted to adults who received cardiac
surgery found that major adverse kidney events (MAKE) at 180 days after surgery (defined
by death, RRT, or persistent abnormal kidney function) also increased with both higher SCr
and urine output stages.26 In a study by Bianchi et al., examining the KDIGO 2012 criteria in
an adult ICU in Switzerland, urine output identified AKI in patients who did not fulfill SCr
criteria or increased their AKI stage in 8073 (51.7%) patients with AKI.27, 28 This included
2443 (30.2%) patients whose AKI severity stage was increased by adding urine output
criteria. This reclassification of the AKI stage with the addition of urine output to SCr criteria
had important prognostic implications, as 90-day mortality varied by urine output category
within each SCr category. In multivariable adjusted models, greater urine output stages were
50

associated with a significantly higher 90-day mortality within each SCr stage; for example,
among patients with Stage 1 AKI based on SCr, those with Stage 3, 2, 1 and no AKI based
on urine output criteria had 90-day mortality risks of 37%, 17%, 16%, and 11%, respectively.
Additional studies have demonstrated that the addition of the urine output criteria to the SCr
criteria further stratifies patients for risk of adverse patient outcomes 25, 26, 28-30

AF
T

Recently, alternative urine output criteria based on modified thresholds for urine
output staging have been proposed (Supplementary Tables S11 and S12). Machado et al.
compared the sensitivity and specificity of different urine thresholds and time frames for
mortality prediction in critically ill adults.31 They selected 3 cut-off points for alternative
urine output staging: Stage 1 (0.2–0.3 ml/kg/h), Stage 2 (0.1–0.2 ml/kg/h), and Stage 3 (<0.1
ml/kg/h), all over 6 hours. When combined with KDIGO SCr criteria, this alternative staging
system exhibited better discrimination, with net improvement in risk classification compared
with the KDIGO 2012 urine output and SCr criteria for predicting mortality. This suggests
that lower urine thresholds within 6 hours are prognostically important in critically ill adults
but further research is needed.

R

The inclusion of structural criteria for AKI based on elevation of damage biomarkers
has been shown to further improve the classification and prognostic risk stratification of AKI
beyond that provided by SCr alone. A pooled analysis of critically ill patients from 10
observational studies reported that, among patients meeting SCr criteria for AKI, the
subsequent risk of RRT initiation, length of ICU and hospital stay, and in-hospital mortality
were greater in NGAL-positive compared with NGAL-negative patients.32 In a study of adult
patients receiving mechanical ventilation, SCr combined with urinary NGAL provided a
more accurate prediction of RRT requirement than SCr or NGAL alone.33 Another structural
biomarker, CCL14, has been shown to identify patients at higher risk of persistent (≥72
hours) Stage 3 AKI in critically ill patients meeting KDIGO 2012 Stage 2 or 3 AKI criteria. 34

D

The updated staging system for AKI presented here incorporates both functional
(SCr, and urine output) in addition to structural criteria (damage biomarkers) to stage the
severity of AKI and to improve risk stratification for important clinical outcomes of AKI.
Although measurement of SCr is routinely performed in many acute care settings, accurate
measurement of urine output is not feasible in all clinical settings which limits accurate
staging of patients outside intensive care units and for patients without urinary catheters.
This revised staging system places a high value on more granular evaluation of AKI
severity based on prognosis. However, new damage biomarker tests are more expensive and
availability is limited in both high and low resource settings. Nonetheless, relevant
components of the staging system can be employed to classify the severity of AKI according
to the measurements available in a given institution.

51

Practice Point 1.2.2: Transient AKI is differentiated from persistent AKI based on an
increase in SCr or cystatin C or decrease in urine output lasting ≤48 versus >48 hours
(Table 7).
Table 7 | Definitions of transient and persistent AKI
Duration of reduction in kidney function
Transient AKI
≤48 hour increase in SCr or cystatin C or reduced urine output
Persistent AKI
>48 hour and up to 7 days increase in SCr or cystatin C or
reduced urine output
AKI, acute kidney injury; SCr, serum creatinine

D

R

AF
T

Since publication of the KDIGO 2012 AKI guideline, there have been variations in
how the trajectory of kidney function, resolution, and transient versus persistent AKI have
been defined (Supplementary Tables S13 and S14). Transient AKI has typically been defined
by a return of SCr to baseline levels within 48–72 hours. Studies of AKI resolution patterns
have consistently demonstrated that complete and sustained reversal of AKI within this
timeframe is associated with better long-term outcomes.35-57 This may reflect the fact that
transient AKI is often caused by reduced kidney perfusion, and that correction of kidney
perfusion, such as by correcting volume status or removing medications that lower
glomerular pressure, can rapidly restore kidney function to baseline levels. In 2017, the
Acute Disease Quality Initiative (ADQI) group recommended defining transient or rapid
reversal of AKI as within 48 hours of onset and persistent AKI as beyond 48 hours. 58 Jensen
et al. showed in a large population-based cohort that, compared to transient AKI (≤48 hours),
persistent AKI (2–7 days) was associated with a higher incidence of CKD and kidney
failure.44 Analysis of a large cohort of hospitalized patients showed that mortality was higher
in those with persistent AKI compared with transient AKI defined as reversal within 48
hours.40 A cohort study from the Veterans Health Administration in the U.S. demonstrated
a >40% increase in risk of CKD G3 or higher following transient AKI lasting less than 2
days, compared to a 2-fold increase in risk among those with AKI whose kidney function
recovered to within 0.3 mg/dl of baseline SCr within 3–10 days.57 Distinguishing persistent
versus transient AKI is thus relevant to assessing the long-term risk of CKD, kidney failure,
and survival after AKI, with implications for subsequent lab testing and follow-up of people
with AKI. Standardizing the definition for transient and persistent AKI is important to enable
consistent communication about the trajectory of AKI and for comparison of both
epidemiological and clinical studies.
The Work Group favored the adoption of a 48-hour time frame as opposed to the 72hour time frame because i) an earlier assessment of kidney function after onset of AKI was
felt to be most clinically appropriate, and ii) it reflects the definitions used in the majority of
the available evidence and the consistency of relationships with CKD and mortality across
studies. Although most studies have defined transient versus persistent AKI on the basis of
SCr alone, the Work Group felt it was appropriate to also apply this timeframe to other

52

functional criteria for AKI, including serum cystatin C and urine output. This definition
applies to both children and adults.
Practice Point 1.2.3: The underlying cause of AKI should be identified based on
susceptibilities and exposures, clinical context, history and physical examination, and
appropriate diagnostic laboratory and imaging testing to inform specific management.

AF
T

AKI is a heterogeneous clinical syndrome with many etiologies, which vary in
frequency by clinical setting and their responsiveness to general supportive care of the
acutely ill patient. Some causes of AKI require specific treatments, including acute
glomerulonephritis, vasculitis, interstitial nephritis, thrombotic microangiopathy, and urinary
tract obstruction (Table 8). In some patients, AKI is part of a systemic illness, such as
myeloma or connective tissue disease where AKI may improve with treatment of the
underlying condition. The clinical evaluation of AKI includes a careful history and physical
examination to identify exposures and susceptibilities and guide appropriate laboratory and
imaging tests.

D

R

Important exposures include dehydration, infections, trauma, burns, surgery, shock,
drugs, poisons, and toxins. Susceptibilities to AKI following these exposures can vary
between individuals on the basis of age, sex, race and comorbidities such as CKD, diabetes
mellitus, cancer, heart, lung, and liver disease.

53

Table 8 | Causes of AKI requiring specific treatments to protect the kidney
Causes
Diagnostic tests
Evaluation of intravascular volume and
cardiac function, urinary diagnostic indices
(e.g., fractional excretion of sodium or urea)

Acute glomerulonephritis,
vasculitis, thrombotic
microangiopathy

Urine sediment analysis, serologic testing,
hematologic testing, kidney biopsy

Urinary tract obstruction

Kidney imaging (ultrasound or CT)

Acute interstitial nephritis

Urinalysis and microscopy; kidney biopsy;
eosinophilia

AF
T

Reduction of renal perfusion

Therapeutic managements
Stabilize and optimize renal perfusion;
fluids/vasopressors for volume
depletion/shock. Decongestion for right
heart failure, relief of elevated
intraabdominal pressure.
Steroids, immunosuppressive therapy,
plasma exchange, discontinuation of
causative agents
Urological/radiological intervention for
release of obstruction
Discontinuation of offending
trigger/substance; consideration of
steroid therapy

Evaluation of effective blood volume and
Vasoconstrictive agents (e.g.,
portal hypertension; urine sodium, urine
terlipressin), liver transplantation
NGAL
Abnormal monoclonal proteins (M proteins)
Reducing light chains by hydration,
Multiple myeloma
and free light chains in blood and urine,
chemotherapy ± plasmapheresis
kidney biopsy
Increased creatinine kinase and myoglobin
Rhabdomyolysis
in blood and/or urine; positive hematuria
Fluid therapy
with no RBC in urine sediment with
LDH, uric acid, serum calcium, serum
Xanthine oxidase inhibitor to reduce uric
Tumor lysis syndrome
phosphate
acid production
AKI, acute kidney injury; CT, computed tomography; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; NGAL, neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin

D
R

Hepatorenal syndrome

54

1.3. Definition of AKD
Practice Point 1.3.1: Acute kidney disease (AKD) in children and adults is defined as
the presence of any of the following functional or structural criteria in the appropriate
clinical context with a duration ≤3 months (Table 9).
Table 9 | Criteria for AKD (any one or more of the following with a duration ≤3 months)
Functional criteria
Structural criteria
AKI (by functional criteria),
AKI (by structural criteria)
Or
Or
GFR <60 ml/min per 1.73 m2*
Marker of kidney damage (albuminuria,
Or
hematuria, or leukocyturia are most common)
2
Decrease in GFR by ≥35 ml/min per 1.73 m
from baseline
Or
Increase in SCr by >50%

AF
T

*GFR <60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 criterion does not apply to children younger than 2 years old. AKI,
acute kidney disease; AKI, acute kidney injury; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; SCr, serum creatinine

D

R

AKD includes AKI as well as alterations of kidney function and structure with a
duration ≤3 months. Patients with AKD may not meet the criteria for AKI because the GFR
decline is not sufficient to fulfill criteria for AKI (i.e., GFR decline is too small or too slow).
Recognizing AKD enables an integrated clinical approach to people with abnormalities of
kidney function and structure, including alterations of kidney function and structure that do
not meet the criteria for the definition of either AKI or CKD, yet may need medical attention
to restore kidney function and reverse damage to kidney structure to avoid adverse outcomes.
AKD is nearly 3 times as prevalent as AKI (Figure 2).59 The association between AKD and
adverse patient outcomes has been well-established with many observational studies showing
that AKD without AKI is associated with CKD, requirement for RRT, MAKE, length of
hospital stay, and mortality (Supplementary Table S15). This definition applies to both
children and adults.

Figure 2 | AKD, AKI, and kidney disease outcomes. AKD, acute kidney disease; AKI,
acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidney disease; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; NKD, no
kidney disease
A recent systematic review on the incidence of AKD and its associated adverse
outcomes included 59 studies involving almost 6 million participants.60 The authors included
studies defining AKD by the KDIGO definition. The pooled incidence of AKD defined by
55

the KDIGO criteria was 11.1% (95% CI: 7.6%–16.3%). Among studies that were not
restricted only to patients with AKI at study entry, AKD incidence was similar at 11.1% and
the pooled odds ratio (OR) of all-cause mortality associated with AKD was 3.8 (95% CI:
2.2–6.7).

AF
T

Recognition of AKD across healthcare settings identifies patients with kidney disease
at risk of adverse long-term kidney and related outcomes, such as cardiovascular events and
mortality. There may be a risk of misdiagnosing CKD as AKD when prior testing has not
been performed, leading to unnecessary interventions and anxiety. Increased testing may
place an additional burden on healthcare systems and there also may be variability in
interpretation and management. However, earlier identification and management of AKD
may reduce longer term costs associated with CKD such as the requirement for RRT and
cardiovascular complications. Education and training of healthcare professionals on
interpretation of this definition is required, particularly in primary care as it is more
commonly encountered in the outpatient setting, and healthcare professionals may be less
familiar with management approaches for AKD than CKD. Where possible, integration into
electronic health care record systems and decision support tools may assist the
implementation.
Practice Point 1.3.2: AKD without AKI should be differentiated from AKD following
AKI because the underlying causes and clinical management can be different.

R

The diseases and disorders that cause AKI can impact long-term kidney function and
so AKD may be present following AKI, with the risk varying according to AKI severity and
preexisting CKD. Patients can also be identified with AKD without meeting criteria for AKI.
In these patients, changes in kidney function and structure are not of sufficient magnitude or
identified rapidly enough to meet AKI criteria yet have been shown to be prognostically
important.

D

A cohort study of 1.1 million adult Canadian residents concluded that AKD without
AKI was 3 times more common than AKI, and was more often identified on outpatient rather
than inpatient SCr and albuminuria testing.61 AKD without AKI was significantly associated
with an increased risk for mortality and RRT requirement in comparison with no kidney
disease. However, the multivariable-adjusted hazard ratio (HR) of mortality for AKD without
AKI was lower than for AKI. AKD without AKI was also associated with a higher risk of
new onset CKD than AKI among patients without preexisting CKD. In a cohort of over 5900
critically ill pediatric patients with preserved baseline kidney function, AKD without AKI
was independently associated with a >7-fold increased odds of MAKE at 90 days (MAKE90),
including persistent abnormal kidney function, dialysis, or death, compared to those with no
AKD (adjusted OR: 7.83; 95% CI: 4.54–13.51).62

56

AKD without AKI is often seen in community or primary care settings and has been
described in populations with liver cirrhosis,63, 64 acute decompensated heart failure,65 and
among patients who received a kidney biopsy, including those with biopsy-proven crescentic
glomerulonephritis.66 AKD without AKI likely identifies patients with a distinct distribution
of etiologies of kidney disease and concomitant risk of adverse outcomes, which may warrant
different clinical management strategies to those with AKD following AKI.
1.4. AKI and AKD resolution
Practice Point 1.4.1: Complete and partial resolution of AKI and AKD are defined by
changes in SCr, serum cystatin C, or estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) as
shown in Table 10.
Table 10 | Criteria for resolution of AKI and AKD
Complete resolution
AKI
SCr or serum cystatin C <1.2 times higher
than baseline within 7 days
AKD SCr or serum cystatin C <1.2 times higher
than baseline,
Or
eGFR >80% of baseline within 3 months

AF
T

Partial resolution
SCr or serum cystatin C ≥1.2 to <1.5 times
higher than baseline within 7 days
SCr or serum cystatin C ≥1.2 to <1.5 times
higher than baseline,
Or
eGFR <80% to >66% of baseline within 3
months
AKD, acute kidney disease; AKI, acute kidney injury; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate;
SCr, serum creatinine

D

R

Although many studies have evaluated the relationships between recovery of kidney
function based on SCr values and patient outcomes, inconsistent definitions have been used
for resolution of AKI and AKD67 and considerable variation of the criteria is applied in the
published literature.38, 51, 52, 54, 56, 57, 68, 69 A standardized definition in children and adults is
important for both clinical practice and research. Firstly, a lack of a standard definition
results in variations of interpretation by healthcare professionals which leads to inconsistent
decision-making around different aspects of clinical care such as follow-up planning and
resource allocation. Secondly, identifying partial resolution can allow for earlier
interventions with the potential to mitigate the AKI to CKD transition and thus improve
kidney outcomes. Thirdly, a standardized definition would allow for comparison across
studies and is vital for clinical trial design as well as for validation of biomarkers that predict
resolution versus nonresolution.
The Work Group judged that a return of SCr to <1.2 times higher than baseline
indicates return of GFR to baseline for most patients, allowing for non-clinically significant
fluctuations in SCr. The prognostic relevance of this definition is supported by several
studies. Pannu et al. examined different percentage changes in SCr from baseline to define
recovery of kidney function in a population-based cohort in Alberta, Canada.54 There was a
significantly higher risk for mortality and adverse kidney outcomes among patients with AKI
and a SCr that remained 25% above baseline at 90 days after AKI onset. In a population57

based cohort from Scotland, Sawhney et al. defined complete resolution of AKI by the last
SCr <1.2 times higher than baseline SCr and partial resolution of AKI as the last SCr ≥1.2 to
<1.5 times higher than baseline within 7 of AKI onset. The percentage of patients without
subsequent kidney recovery by 90 days was 3.5% among those with complete resolution,
10.4% among those with partial resolution, and 30.1% without partial or complete
resolution.69

AF
T

By definition, patients with AKI who do not recover kidney function by 7 days are
deemed to have AKD which can last for up to 3 months. Resolution of AKD should be
determined before 3 months since closer clinical assessment to identify and address factors
that may cause ongoing kidney injury and mediate AKD to CKD transition may be
warranted. Beyond 3 months, patients without resolution of AKD meet the criteria for CKD
and should be described as having CKD and a history of AKD (Section 6.3). Large
population-based studies have examined the prognosis of AKD according to SCr recovery
status within 3 months of AKI onset.38, 68 These studies have demonstrated that people with
AKD are at increased risk for development of new onset CKD as well as progression of
preexisting CKD.38, 61 People not meeting criteria for CKD after the period of AKD should
be described as having a history of AKD and can be further distinguished as having partial or
complete resolution of AKD, to further identify their increased risk for new onset or
progression of CKD.
1.5. Recurrent AKI
Practice Point 1.5.1: Recurrent AKI is defined as a new episode of AKI occurring after
partial or complete resolution from a previous episode of AKI.

D

R

Recurrent AKI is associated with adverse outcomes.46, 50, 55 However, there is
considerable variation in how recurrent AKI has been defined previously. Liu et al. defined
recurrent AKI in adults as being rehospitalized with a SCr level increase by ≥0.3 mg/dl
within 48 hours of readmission or ≥50% above a “baseline” SCr level.55 Walker et al.
defined recurrent AKI as meeting the biochemical definition of AKI within the observation
period of 6 years50 and Altawalbeh et al., within 5 years.46
In the Assessment of Worldwide Acute Kidney injury Epidemiology in Neonates
(AWAKEN) cohort study of 2162 critically ill neonates, recurrent AKI was defined as a new
AKI episode occurring only after SCr had returned to the prior baseline.36 Among neonates
with AKI, 22% experienced recurrent AKI. These infants had significantly longer hospital
stays than those with a single episode of AKI (median 60 vs. 18 days). Recurrent AKI was
also independently associated with reduced likelihood of discharge (adjusted HR: 0.7; 95%
CI: 0.6–0.9). Similarly, in a retrospective cohort of preterm neonates ≤28 weeks gestation,
Adegboyega et al. found that 24% developed recurrent AKI.47 Early-onset and severe initial
AKI were associated with increased risk for recurrent AKI, which in turn was linked with a

58

significantly longer hospital stay (+36 days) and increased mortality (adjusted OR: 4.55; 95%
CI: 1.12–18.51) compared to a single episode of AKI.
The Work Group deemed that the definition of recurrent AKI be consistent with the
proposed resolution definition (Table 10), so that each episode of AKI is identified as a
separate event, based on a new baseline SCr or cystatin C where warranted, without imposing
a timeframe between a first and subsequent AKI episode. A standardized definition will
allow for comparison of predictors, incidence, and prognosis across studies, and could aid in
distinguishing patients with new episodes warranting assessment from those with sequelae of
AKD or CKD.

AF
T

1.6. Considerations specific to children
1.6.1. Definition of AKI
Practice Point 1.6.1.1: Age specific references ranges should be used when serum
cystatin C is used to detect AKI in children.

R

In children, like adults, AKI is defined by functional and structural criteria (Table 1).
Serum cystatin C as an alternative marker of kidney function that has robust evidence of
performance in children across diverse clinical settings, including critical illness, septic
shock, cardiac surgery, and liver disease with strong diagnostic performance for early AKI
detection. However, cystatin C levels are influenced by age, with known elevations during
infancy and changes in adolescence due to developmental changes. Therefore, age-specific
reference ranges are essential for accurate interpretation, particularly when using cystatin C
to detect AKI in neonates. Serum cystatin C levels vary significantly during puberty: median
concentrations increase in boys (to approximately 0.98 mg/l) and decrease in girls (to around
0.86 mg/l) between ages 11 and 14. These changes strongly correlate with Tanner stage
(β = +0.105 mg/l per stage in males and β = –0.093 mg/l in females, both p < 0.01).70

D

1.6.2. Determination of baseline kidney function
Practice Point 1.6.2.1: In children (except neonates), select the baseline SCr or serum
cystatin C for an AKI episode using a hierarchical approach (Figure 3).

59

AF
T

Figure 3 | Hierarchical approach to the selection of the baseline SCr value used to
characterize an AKI event in children*. *A representative outpatient SCr should ideally
reflect the mean, median, or most recent value within 3 months of admission or acute event.
AKI, acute kidney injury; Cys C, cystatin C; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate;
RRT, renal replacement therapy; SCr, serum creatinine

R

In children, defining baseline SCr for AKI diagnosis requires an approach that
prioritizes outpatient values obtained within the past 3 months, recognizing that kidney
function changes more dynamically in children than in adults.71 However, access to
outpatient SCr values may not be available in some settings. Wherever possible, systems
should ideally be integrated or if this is not possible, outpatient values should be accessible to
clinicians in secondary care settings. Education of healthcare professionals is required to
ensure optimum implementation of this recommendation.

D

When such values are unavailable or not appropriate, it is reasonable to use equations
such as the age-based creatinine and age-based creatinine with recovery equations, which
were derived from a large cohort of hospitalized children without known CKD (Table 11).72,
73 However, they have important limitations.
When no prior values are available, using the admission SCr may be acceptable with
caution, although this approach risks underrecognizing AKI in children who present with
early kidney injury.

60

Table 11 | Baseline creatinine estimation methods in children
Method
Description
Strengths
Previous outpatient or preMost accurate if GFR
Known baseline
illness SCr value from
measured prior to acute
SCr
medical records in the past
illness
3 months in children
More accurate estimate of
eGFR at higher GFRs;
assumes no CKD

Widely validated and
Back-calculation
standard in pediatric AKI
using a validated
research; accounts for
GFR estimating
body size
equation
Use of the Pottel (Q-age)
equation for children,
Does not require height;
without need for height or
useful in low-resource
weight to back calculate
settings
SCr assuming a GFR of 120
ml/min per 1.73 m²
Uses population normative
SCr ranges by age and sex
from healthy children

Quick and easy when
height is unavailable

D
R

Normative agebased SCr
values

Assumes no preexisting
CKD

Best use context
When prior
measurements are
available in the absence
of acute illness
When no prior or
subsequent lower SCr
measurement are
available

AF
T

Use of the Schwartz
equation for children,
incorporating height to
calculate SCr, assuming an
eGFR of 100–120 ml/min
per 1.73 m²

Limitations
Often unavailable in
acute settings; may not
reflect current status if
outdated

Overestimates GFR in
infants or underweight
children; assumes fixed
GFR

When height is
available

Less accurate in
children with atypical
growth or development

In settings lacking
height measurements or
in lean/malnourished
children

May misclassify AKI
due to inter-individual
variability; not
personalized

When no other
measurements are
available

Not useful early in
hospitalized children;
In acute care settings
Reflects individual
may underestimate if
Nadir SCr
with multiple
Uses lowest measured SCr
patient's physiology;
resolution is incomplete
(lowest during
measurements and no
during hospital stay
better in patients with
or in critical illness with
hospitalization)
known preadmission
serial SCr measurement augmented clearance or
values
decreased creatine
production
AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidney disease; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; SCr, serum
creatinine
61

Practice Point 1.6.2.2: In children, specific considerations related to age are needed
when determining a baseline SCr.
In pediatric studies, eGFR values are typically reported within the range of 100–120
ml/min per 1.73 m² and not all equations to determine baseline SCr consider patient age
(Table 10). For instance, back-calculating baseline SCr using a fixed eGFR of 100–120
ml/min per 1.73 m2 with the Schwartz equation has been shown to be particularly inaccurate
in children under 2 years of age, where kidney function is physiologically lower and more
variable. 74 Although using an assumed eGFR of 120 ml/min per 1.73 m² tends to produce
lower bias with about 25% absolute error, opting for 100 ml/min per 1.73 m² may provide a
more conservative estimate to minimize the risk of overestimating AKI.75

AF
T

In younger children, the use of age-based normative GFR values substantially
improves the accuracy and agreement of the estimated baseline SCr. Height-dependent
equations may not be feasible in hospitalized children because height is often missing or
unreliable in health records during acute illnesses.
Differences in methods for establishing baseline kidney function can affect whether
patients meet AKI criteria leading to both over- and underdiagnosis. Underdiagnosis of AKI
can lead to delayed recognition thereby delaying investigations and treatment. Overdiagnosis
of AKI in people with CKD may expose patients to unwarranted tests and interventions. In
addition, use of varying methods in epidemiological studies impacts the comparability of
findings, limiting interpretation of consistency of findings across different geographic
regions and clinical settings.

D

R

1.6.3. Criteria for neonatal AKI
Practice Point 1.6.3.1: The criteria for neonatal AKI include a lack of decline in SCr
within the first 7 days of birth, in addition to neonatal specific increases in SCr or
cystatin C levels, or reduced urine output. (Table 12).
Table 12 | Criteria for AKI in neonates (any one or more of the following within the
corresponding time period)
Neonatal AKI criteria
• No decline in SCr from birth to 7 days of life
• Increase in SCr by ≥0.3 mg/dl (≥26.5 µmol/l) within 48 hours
• Increase in SCr by ≥1.5 times baseline that is known or presumed to have
occurred within the prior 7 days
• Increase in serum cystatin C by 1.25 times baseline that is known or
presumed to have occurred within the prior 7 days
• Serum cystatin C >2.2 mg/dl
• Urine output of less than 1.0 ml/kg/h for ≥24 hours
AKI, acute kidney injury; SCr, serum creatinine

62

The definition of AKI in neonates requires modifications to the criteria for children
and adults in order to ensure accurate identification. Neonatal GFR is low at birth due to
immature kidney function, low kidney blood flow, and incomplete nephrogenesis,
particularly in preterm neonates.76-78 At birth, neonatal SCr primarily reflects maternal
creatinine levels. Over the first approximately 7 postnatal days, neonates typically experience
a physiologic decline in SCr, reflecting the transition from placental clearance to endogenous
kidney function. A failure to decrease SCr during this time suggests the presence of AKI. 79, 80
The rate of this decline is gestational age-dependent, with more immature neonates
demonstrating a slower decrease in SCr levels.81, 82

AF
T

The 0.3 mg/dl increase within 48 hours and 1.5 times increase of SCr from baseline
within 7 days criteria for neonatal AKI originate from the KDIGO 2012 AKI guideline. 12
Since then, numerous studies have demonstrated that these thresholds correlate with
increased mortality and morbidity in neonates.83-93 Notably, the neonatal KDIGO AKI
definition uses the lowest prior SCr value as the baseline for comparison with subsequent
SCr measurements.

R

Urine output plays a critical role in neonatal AKI identification and should be adapted
to neonatal physiology. Technical challenges in neonatal urine output monitoring include the
difficulty in obtaining accurate measurements due to the reliance on diaper weights, which
can be imprecise due to mixing with stool and unmeasured voids. Indwelling catheters pose
risks of infection and may not be feasible due to their small size. Neonates can experience
transient oliguria followed by diuresis in the first few days of life before urine output
stabilizes, making strict urine output thresholds difficult to apply. Given the dynamic nature
of neonatal urine output, AKI definitions should incorporate adjusted urine output thresholds
and require continuous 24-hour monitoring to account for fluctuations beyond the first 24
hours of life.

D

Investigators have explored refining AKI definitions based on chronological and
gestational age, as AKI risk differs between extremely preterm neonates (<29 weeks
gestational age) and more mature neonates.94, 95 However, there is currently insufficient data
to formally recommend gestational age-specific AKI definitions. Additionally, biomarkers
such as urine NGAL and serum cystatin C offer potential improvements in early AKI
detection. Urinary NGAL can serve as a noninvasive biomarker of tubular injury, though
gestational age-specific reference values are still needed.96, 97 Serum cystatin C has emerged
as a promising biomarker for neonatal AKI, offering potential advantages over creatininebased definitions. A large cohort study including over 50,000 neonates found that defining
neonatal AKI as cystatin C ≥2.2 mg/l or an increase of ≥25% was 6.5 times more sensitive in
predicting in-hospital mortality than SCr-based definitions.98
Training neonatal teams on AKI recognition can enhance early detection and
intervention. While access to advanced biomarkers may be constrained in resource-limited
63

settings, innovative and low-cost strategies, such as saliva-based blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
testing, are being explored as noninvasive alternatives for estimating kidney function. 99
These approaches may provide pragmatic solutions for monitoring high-risk neonates when
traditional serum testing is unavailable or impractical.
1.6.4. AKI staging in neonates
Practice Point 1.6.4.1: In neonates, the severity of AKI is staged according to individual
components or combinations of the following SCr and urine output criteria (Table 13).

C2

AF
T

Table 13 | AKI staging criteria in neonates
Functional criteria
Serum creatinine
Urine output
Stage
Criteria
Stage
Criteria
No decline in SCr from
birth to 7 days of life,
Or
>0.5 and ≤1.0
C1
≥0.3 mg/dl (26.5
U1
ml/kg/h for 24 h
µmol/l) increase,
Or
1.5–1.9 times baseline
2–2.9 times baseline

U2

>0.3 and ≤0.5
ml/kg/h for 24 h

D

R

≥3 times baseline
Or
Increase in SCr to ≥2.5
≤0.3 ml/kg/h for
C3
U3
mg/dl (220 µmol/l),
24 h
Or
Initiation of RRT
C1-C3 indicates AKI severity stage according to serum creatinine (SCr) criteria, U1-U3 indicates
AKI severity stage according to urine output criteria, B-/B+ indicates staging by absence or presence
of an elevated damage biomarker. AKI, acute kidney injury; RRT, renal replacement therapy

Use of neonatal-specific thresholds for AKI staging enables more appropriate risk
stratification for morbidity and mortality that can inform clinical management and follow-up.
Large absolute changes in SCr are uncommon in neonates due to low muscle mass and
physiologically low baseline GFR. The SCr criteria for Stage 3 AKI are reduced to 2.5 mg/dl
in neonates, which represents a GFR of <10 ml/min per 1.73 m2. However, it is important to
recognize that even this reduced threshold may still be too high, particularly in preterm
neonates with inherently lower baseline SCr values due to smaller muscle mass. In these
populations, a SCr level of 2.5 mg/dl may reflect profound abnormal kidney function. Further
study is warranted to refine this cutoff in preterm infants and better align AKI staging with
meaningful clinical outcomes in this vulnerable group. In resource-rich settings, the inclusion
of additional damage biomarkers such as NGAL and filtration markers such as serum
cystatin C may enhance AKI severity staging.
64

D

R

AF
T

The use of neonatal-specific criteria introduces additional complexity and may be
influenced by delayed creatinine kinetics or transient physiologic oliguria in neonates. There
is a small risk of overestimating the severity of AKI using these criteria, particularly in
preterm infants or those with non-kidney comorbidities that influence fluid status and
creatinine handling. This may lead to a greater utilization of healthcare resources, including
biomarker testing and nephrology consultations. These extra demands on resources are
expected to be balanced by earlier recognition and timely treatment due to the high risk of
morbidity and mortality associated with AKI severity in neonates. The potential for timely
intervention and prevention of progression to kidney failure or death outweighs the risks of
overdiagnosis and resource use in most clinical contexts.

65

CHAPTER 2. AKI PREDICTION, RISK STRATIFICATION,
AND DIAGNOSTIC EVALUATION

D

R

AF
T

The risk of AKI is altered by the presence of factors that increase susceptibility to
AKI in combination with exposures that cause AKI. There are several features that determine
a person’s susceptibility to AKI including demographic characteristics, genetics, social and
environmental determinants, as well as comorbidities (acute or chronic conditions).
Preexisting CKD and previous episodes of AKI represent major susceptibilities. Common
exposures include conditions that alter fluid balance or hemodynamic status, infections, and
nephrotoxic medications, which are more likely to lead to AKI in susceptible individuals.
The interplay between susceptibilities and exposures is incompletely understood but it is
generally recognized that a person’s degree of susceptibility and intensity of exposures
together increase their risk of developing AKI (Figure 4).

Figure 4 | AKI exposures and susceptibilities. AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic
kidney disease; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
Recognition of a person’s risk factors for developing AKI and associated adverse
outcomes can be useful to target prevention and management strategies to people at risk.
However, the risk of AKI changes in an individual person over time. Although it can be
estimated at a given moment in time (e.g., at a preoperative clinic assessment or upon ICU
admission), it is important to recognize that a person’s risk is dynamic over the course of
illness. Further, some exposures may be modifiable, and addressing these can reduce the risk
of AKI. Susceptibilities and exposures for AKI can differ between community and hospital
settings (Table 14). While there has been increasing knowledge of the epidemiology and
outcomes of community-acquired AKI detected in hospital as well as community-acquired
66

AKI detected in primary care, most current knowledge has been obtained from research on
people in hospitals. Importantly, susceptibilities and exposures may interact in non-linear
ways, such that the same exposure can confer markedly different AKI risk depending on
baseline kidney function, frailty, comorbidity burden, and acute illness severity.

R

AF
T

Table 14 | Common exposures and susceptibilities for community- and hospital-acquired AKI
Setting
Susceptibilities
Exposures
Community•
Dehydration or poor access to
• Gastroenteritis (volume depletion)
acquired AKI
water
• Infections (e.g., pneumonia,
•
Advanced age
leptospirosis, malaria, dengue)
•
Cognitive impairment
• Nephrotoxic herbal remedies and
•
Low socioeconomic status
other complementary/alternative
•
Preexisting CKD
medicines
•
Chronic heart disease
• Snake bites and envenomation
•
Chronic liver disease
• Sepsis (community onset)
•
Pregnancy
• Obstructive uropathy (e.g., stones,
•
Limited access to healthcare
prostate)
• Underlying chronic infections
• Uncontrolled diabetes or
(e.g., HIV, TB)
hypertension
Hospital• CKD
• Sepsis (hospital-acquired)
acquired AKI
• Prematurity
• Major surgery (cardiac,
• Diabetes
abdominal, etc.)
• Heart disease, including
• Critical illness
congenital heart disease
• Circulatory shock
• Liver disease
• Exposure to nephrotoxic
• Anemia
medications
• Advanced age
• Radiocontrast agents
• Malignancy
• Mechanical ventilation
• Polypharmacy
• Solid organ or bone marrow
• ICU stay
transplant
AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidney disease; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; ICU,
intensive care unit; TB, tuberculosis

D

Figure 5 illustrates a risk stratification framework that integrates patient
susceptibilities and clinical exposures, which can be achieved by integrating a variety of
clinical tools to estimate a person’s likelihood of developing AKI (or related outcome). This
framework uses a tiered approach, beginning with identification of low-, moderate-, and
high-risk people using tools such as clinical scoring systems, biomarkers, or predictive
models that have been developed and validated in the specific clinical populations and
settings where they are being applied. For people classified as low risk, regular standards of
care may be appropriate whereas people at moderate or high risk may benefit from enhanced
monitoring, additional risk assessment, or implementation of prevention or management
strategies for AKI. The availability and feasibility of existing risk stratification tools varies
across settings, and the choice of a particular tool will depend on local availability, cost, and
expertise. Further, selection of an appropriate tool is context-specific and will vary by
population and healthcare setting. A personalized approach that applies the right tool for the
67

AF
T

right patient, at the right time in their care is necessary to optimize early recognition of risk,
appropriate interventions, and plan subsequent management, with the objective of reducing
the incidence and/or severity of AKI and its associated adverse outcomes.

R

Figure 5 | Conceptual framework for AKI risk stratification. This figure illustrates a
framework for classifying people by AKI risk across a continuum of clinical severity,
integrating susceptibilities (e.g., age, comorbidities) and exposures (e.g., nephrotoxins,
surgery, sepsis) (Figure 4) with clinical scoring systems, risk models, or biomarker data.
Using these tools, people can be stratified into low, moderate, or high risk of AKI or related
outcome to inform management. This approach supports proactive personalized AKI
prevention, early recognition, and individualized management. AI, artificial intelligence

D

2.1. Risk prediction models
Recommendation 2.1.1: We suggest using externally validated clinical risk models to
identify children and adults at increased risk of AKI and guide the use of kidneyprotective strategies (2C).
This recommendation emphasizes the use of externally validated clinical risk models for
early identification of children and adults at increased risk of AKI. Such models integrate
multiple patient-level and contextual risk factors and have demonstrated significant
discrimination and calibration for predicting AKI, supporting more consistent and objective
risk stratification. Applying these tools in susceptible populations may enable more
appropriate and efficient care through timely implementation of kidney-protective strategies
to people at higher risk. This approach can also avoid unnecessary testing and intervention
in people who are unlikely to benefit. Overall, this approach supports proactive, evidenceinformed personalized care aimed at reducing AKI incidence and associated morbidity.
68

AF
T

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
The primary benefit of using validated risk models is improved identification of
children and adults at increased risk for AKI, enabling earlier and more targeted
implementation of kidney-protective strategies in people at high risk, which may reduce AKI
incidence, severity, and downstream complications. These models can standardize risk
assessment, reduce reliance on subjective clinical judgment, and support more efficient use
of preventive interventions in susceptible populations. Potential harms include
overestimation of risk in some individuals, which could lead to unnecessary monitoring,
interventions, or avoidance of beneficial therapies for underlying conditions. There is also a
risk that poor integration of models into clinical systems can contribute to workflow burden.
Embedding prediction models as electronic health record (EHR) alerts without linked action
pathways may increase alert fatigue and reduce the effectiveness of decision support
interventions. Overall, the anticipated benefits of more accurate risk stratification and
targeted prevention are judged to outweigh the generally low and manageable potential
harms when validated models are applied thoughtfully.

D

R

A systematic review and meta-analysis of 95 studies evaluating 302 externally
validated AKI prediction models used in various populations at risk for AKI found
substantial heterogeneity in model performance, though models generally demonstrated good
discrimination upon external validation for prediction of AKI (overall pooled area under
curve [AUC] 0.78, range 0.75–0.84 across hospitalization, ICU, post-contrast, and
postoperative settings (Supplementary Table S16).100 The cumulative evidence suggests most
externally validated models perform well for predicting AKI onset, AKI severity, and postAKI complications in hospitalized adults, supporting their use in care pathways to identify
high-risk surgical and critically ill populations. These models enable early identification of
people at elevated AKI risk but may also facilitate the targeted application of kidneyprotective strategies. However, there is a high degree of inconsistency across studies
regarding clinical settings, patient populations and predictive performance. Furthermore,
models used different criteria for AKI. The predictive performance of models for the revised
KDIGO AKI criteria is unknown.
Certainty of evidence
There is moderate certainty of evidence that the Mehta score, when used in adults
undergoing cardiac surgery (the population of most studies), has low-to-moderate accuracy to
predict AKI outcomes (specifically, low accuracy to predict incident AKI and moderate
accuracy to predict Stage 3 AKI and RRT).101-106 The level of accuracy was a priori defined
as low for area under the curve (AUC) of 0.51–0.75 and moderate for AUC of 0.76–0.85.
The certainty of evidence for predicting AKI was low, downgraded for methodological issues
69

with the studies and inconsistency across the studies, but moderate for predicting stage 3 AKI
and RRT, which were downgraded for methodological issues but had consistent findings
across studies. Without evidence from trials analyzing clinical impacts, the overall certainty
of evidence for implementing the Mehta score was downgraded, for indirectness, to low.
There is high certainty of evidence that the Simple Postoperative AKI risk (SPARK)
score, when used in adults undergoing noncardiac surgery, has low accuracy (as defined in
the prior paragraph) to predict AKI outcomes.107-109 The certainty of evidence was high for
prediction of incident AKI but moderate for Stage 3 AKI, downgraded for imprecision of the
summary estimate. Without trial evidence, the overall certainty of evidence for implementing
the SPARK score was downgraded, for indirectness, to moderate.

R

AF
T

There is low certainty of evidence that prediction tools, in general, have (overall)
moderate accuracy (as defined above) to predict AKI outcomes in both children and adults.
This conclusion applies to prediction of incident AKI in various settings in children and
adults and also other AKI-related outcomes and mortality in adults. The certainty of evidence
was downgraded for methodological concerns of the studies, a high degree of inconsistency
across studies, related to both statistical and clinical heterogeneity of studies conducted in
different populations, settings, and with very different prediction models,100 in addition to
indirectness since the analyses do not provide evidence for any specific score. Since this
analysis pertains to diagnostic accuracy and not the effect on clinical outcomes of
implementing prediction tools, the overall certainty of evidence was downgraded, for
indirectness, to very low for both children and adults.

D

Values and preferences
Identification of people at high risk of developing any form of AKI or progression to
severe AKI or needing RRT is viewed positively by well-informed patients, in particular if
the predictive models are based on routinely available data, do not require any additional
investigations, are sufficiently accurate, and offer the prospect of potential preventive
interventions to avoid AKI and subsequent adverse outcomes in vulnerable people.
Resource use and costs
Utilizing and applying most validated AKI risk models generally does not require
significant additional direct costs for the patient or institution, as they primarily rely on
healthcare professionals executing models using existing clinical data entered into an integer
scoring system or computer-based calculator. The primary expense with systematic
implementation of predictive models is the upfront and ongoing cost of integrating and
updating (when necessary) the risk calculation within the existing information technology
infrastructure of a hospital, such as an EHR. Further costs should be incurred to ensure the
model continues to accurately calculate risk while other costs may arise from additional
70

testing or treatments being applied to high-risk people. These potential harms may also be
increased by the degree a model falsely classifies people as being at high risk for AKI, which
could result in more unnecessary interventions and increased costs. However, overall, the
primary economic argument for integrating AKI risk models into care is that they may lead
to more targeted prevention efforts for AKI and related complications in people who are
more likely to benefit, reducing the need for scarce or expensive downstream resources for
care (e.g., ICU admission, RRT).110

AF
T

Considerations for implementation
Successful implementation of AKI risk models requires initial investment and
attention to specific clinical, technical, and institutional factors that impact model
performance, uptake, and outcomes. Predictive risk models are only valuable if they are
based on accurate and reliably collected predictor variables and delivered in a manner that
supports clinical judgement. Implementation will achieve greater value when risk
stratification is linked to specific, evidence-based interventions that can improve patient care
and outcomes.

D

R

Rationale
Risk prediction models combine multiple patient-, procedure-, and/or care-related
factors into a structured output on the probability of a future event for an individual person,
which facilitates risk stratification and can guide the timely deployment of kidney-protective
strategies in susceptible populations. Different risk models have been developed to predict
AKI within specified time horizons and using variables ascertained as specific time points;
for instance; for adults undergoing cardiac surgery (e.g., Mehta score; Supplementary Table
S17) or major non-cardiac surgery (e.g., SPARK score; Supplementary Table S18), for
people in the hospital, for people in the ICU,100, 111, 112 and people with sepsis.113, 114 In
addition, risk prediction models have been developed and validated specifically for pediatric
populations across different clinical settings, including hospitalized children,115, 116 children
in the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU),117, 118 pediatric cardiac surgery patients,119 and
children with septic shock120 (Recommendation 2.6.1; Supplementary Table S19). Model
performance can vary depending on the specific patient population and features of the model.
Significant heterogeneity in discrimination has been identified between externally validated
models for AKI,100 necessitating careful selection of models shown to have adequate
performance and clinical utility in the population and clinical setting they will be used.
Most AKI risk models assess risk at a single time point, such as pre-surgery or upon
ICU admission. Some newer models are dynamic, updating scores with data collected
throughout the hospital stay. Examples include models adding intra- and postoperative data
to improve the ability to predict postoperative AKI.121, 122 Similarly, other studies have
demonstrated that risk assessment improves with adding variables from day 1 or day 2 of a
71

non-postoperative ICU stay.111, 123 Thus, dynamic prediction of risk of AKI over time may
provide insights into which patients warrant greater focus on preventive interventions over
the course of an illness trajectory.
Recommendation 2.1.2: We recommend using externally validated clinical risk models
to identify adults at risk of receiving renal replacement therapy (RRT) for AKI to
inform patient choices and shared decision making about their care (1C).

AF
T

This recommendation places a high value on ensuring patients are provided with sufficient
and accurate information on risks to inform their treatment decisions and that their values,
preferences, and care choices are respected. The recommendations places a lower value on
the harm, potential use of excess resources, and inconvenience that could result from
clinically important overestimates of risk in a person who ultimately does not require support
with RRT.

D

R

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Valid risk prediction models can help identify adults at higher risk of requiring RRT
for AKI which can support timely, informed discussions about prognosis, treatment options,
and care planning. These models can enhance shared decision-making by providing
individualized risk estimates that help align clinical decisions with patient values and
preferences. However, all existing prediction models were developed prior to landmark RRT
timing trials.124-128 A potential harm exists if the data supporting the model or data on the
initiation of RRT changes and it increases the potential harm of incorrectly starting (or not
starting) RRT (Chapter 5). Potential harms include misclassification of risk which may cause
unnecessary anxiety, premature decision-making, or inappropriate preparation for RRT in
some patients. Overreliance on model outputs could also diminish clinical judgment or lead
to inequities if models are applied outside the populations in which they were validated.
Overall, when used as adjuncts to clinical assessment, the benefits of improved prognostic
clarity and patient-centered decision-making outweigh the relatively low risk of harm.
The Mehta score has been shown to predict need for RRT in adults undergoing
cardiac surgery. Evidence review of data from 3 trials concluded that the predictive accuracy
of the Mehta score was moderate with an AUC of 0.78 (0.69–0.87; Supplementary Table
S17). There was no data on the accuracy of the SPARK score in adults undergoing major
non-cardiac surgery.
Thakar et al. derived a clinical risk score in 33,217 participants undergoing cardiac
surgery, reporting C-statistics of approximately 0.80 for postoperative AKI and 0.95 for
dialysis-requiring AKI.129 Similarly, Wijeysundera et al. developed and externally validated
a simplified predictive index for RRT in a cohort of 928 participants, achieving AUCs of
72

0.93–0.95.130 Together, these large, diverse. inpatient cohorts, leveraging detailed
perioperative and clinical variables, demonstrate that models built on real-world data can
provide reasonably accurate estimates for predicting the need for RRT in AKI.
Zuo et al. validated a model for RRT requirement specifically for people with acute
pancreatitis with excellent discrimination, calibration, and clinical utility, emphasizing that
additional risk stratification for RRT for AKI can be achieved for disease-specific
situations.131 Models such as AKIpredictor111 and those by Malhotra et al.112 provide broader
ICU applicability and can be incorporated into electronic systems to aid identification of
people at high risk.

AF
T

Certainty of evidence
There is moderate certainty of evidence that the Mehta score has moderate accuracy
(defined as AUC between 0.76 and 0.85) to predict RRT in adults undergoing cardiac surgery
(the population of most studies).102-104 The certainty of evidence was downgraded for some
methodological limitations of the studies. Without trial evidence, the overall certainty of
evidence for implementing the Mehta score was downgraded, for indirectness, to low.
Eligible studies conducted in children did not report RRT, nor did they evaluate the SPARK
score to predict RRT specifically.

D

R

There is low certainty of evidence that prediction tools, in general, have (overall)
moderate accuracy to predict RRT in adults. The certainty of evidence was downgraded for
methodological concerns of the studies and a high degree of inconsistency across studies,
related to both statistical and clinical heterogeneity of studies conducted in different
populations, settings, and with very different prediction models,100 in addition to indirectness
since the analyses do not provide evidence for any specific score. Without trial evidence, the
overall certainty of evidence for implementing the Mehta score was downgraded, for
indirectness, to low. Eligible studies conducted in children did not report RRT.
Values and preferences
The initiation of RRT represents an escalation in medical care requirements,
accompanied by increased utilization of healthcare resources, increased workload for
healthcare professionals, prolonged hospitalization, and elevated healthcare expenditures.
Receipt of RRT significantly impacts patient experience and burden of care, and most people
want to avoid RRT, and if required, may benefit from being made aware and prepared to
receive it. Identification of people at high risk of needing RRT is likely to be viewed
positively by well-informed patients, in particular since it offers the prospect of potential
preventive interventions, patient-centered counselling, earlier nephrology consultation, and
timely preparation of RRT, including potential transfer to appropriate clinical settings such as
ICU or a site with dialysis services.
73

AF
T

Resource use and costs
Use of validated risk models generally requires modest resources, as most models
rely on routinely collected clinical and laboratory data already available in electronic health
records. Implementation costs may include integration into clinical workflows or electronic
systems, healthcare professional training, and periodic updates. These upfront investments
are likely to be offset by more efficient use of resources through improved targeting of
education, planning, and preparatory interventions for people at higher risk of RRT. As
noted, a potential harm exists if the data supporting the model or evidence on the timing of
RRT changes and the potential harm of incorrectly starting (or not starting) RRT increases
(Chapter 5). Further, falsely classifying people as high risk for RRT can result from
additional interventions and unnecessary transfer to an ICU or dialysis center. Earlier and
better-informed shared decision-making may also reduce potentially avoidable or unwanted
interventions and improve alignment of care with patient preferences. Overall, the resource
requirements are considered reasonable relative to the potential benefits in care planning
efficiency and patient-centered outcomes.

D

R

Considerations for implementation
Implementation of this recommendation requires selection of validated risk models
for RRT that are appropriate for the local patient population and clinical setting. This is
particularly important in rural and low-resource settings, as clinical practice patterns, access,
and resources for RRT differ across jurisdictions necessitating steps to determine whether a
model developed to predict RRT elsewhere (often a high-resource setting) provides accurate
information in another setting.129, 132-138 Integration of models into existing clinical
workflows and EHRs is important to ensure timely access to risk estimates without adding
undue burden to healthcare professionals. Healthcare professionals should receive training on
model interpretation, limitations, and how to communicate risk clearly and sensitively to
support shared decision-making. Risk models should be used as adjuncts to, rather than
replacements for, clinical judgment and individualized patient assessment. Ongoing
evaluation of model performance, equity, and patient understanding is important to ensure
appropriate and effective use in practice.
Rationale
This recommendation is based on evidence that several externally validated risk
models for AKI requiring RRT have shown very good calibration and discrimination,129, 130,
138, 139 with overall pooled AUROC of 0.82 (95% CI: 0.79–0.85; Supplementary Tables S16),
and with some individual external validation studies exhibiting AUROCs as high as 0.95.
This has most consistently been demonstrated for models predicting postoperative RRT for
AKI. Large inpatient cohorts have demonstrated that models based on routinely collected
clinical and laboratory variables can perform well for preoperative prediction of the need for
74

RRT for AKI following cardiac and major non-cardiac surgery.122, 129, 140 Further, some
research suggests these models can more accurately and consistently estimate a person’s risk
of progression to RRT than clinical judgment alone.141 Reliable risk stratification supports
timely, transparent discussions about prognosis, treatment options, and future care planning,
which are central to shared decision-making. Providing patients with individualized,
evidence-based risk information helps them to better understand potential trajectories and
align decisions with their values and preferences. External validation increases confidence
that these models can maintain performance in other populations and settings, although this
should be tested in a new (external) population where a model for RRT that was derived
elsewhere will be implemented. Overall, use of validated risk models promotes patientcentered, informed, and equitable decision-making around RRT for AKI.

AF
T

Practice Point 2.1.1: In community and low-resource settings, simplified AKI risk
scores can support early identification and management of adults at risk for
community-acquired AKI.

R

In low resource, community-based settings, the ISN 0by25 multicenter feasibility
study demonstrated that a simple symptom‐based risk score (including vomiting, low oral
intake, weakness, oliguria, hypotension, loss of appetite and swelling; Table 15) could be
used to guide point‐of‐care (POC) SCr and urine dipstick testing, resulting in improved early
AKI recognition and management. Across Bolivia, Nepal, and Malawi, 2101 people at
moderate-to-high risk were identified using this score. After implementation of the POC
driven protocol, more people with AKI were recognized (34.6% vs. 24.5%, p<0.0001).142
This was associated with a reduction in hospital admissions from 59% to 49% (p <0.001).

D

Table 15 | International Society of Nephrology 0by25 studya–Clinical risk score for communityacquired acute kidney injury142
Risk factor
Points
History of kidney disease
1
Presence of oliguria
4
Infection with fever
1
Hypotension or shock
2
Pregnancy with hypertension/seizures
2
Whole body swelling
2
Loss of appetite
1
HIV on HAART
1
Coma/confusion
2
Anemia/pallor
1
Max total
17
a
In the 0by25 feasibility study, among enrolled participants screened as moderate-to-high risk (score
≥3), the observed 7-day AKI risk was ~30% (severe AKI ~18%). Risk varied by kidney disease status
at enrollment: No kidney disease 13.9% (98/705); acute kidney disease 36.6% (439/1199); and
chronic kidney disease 46.2% (91/197). HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; HAART, highly active
antiretroviral therapy
75

These results support the practical application of simple risk tools in settings where
conventional laboratory infrastructure is limited. By enabling frontline healthcare
professionals to determine when to obtain SCr measurements, AKI was diagnosed and could
be managed earlier.142 Building on this model, the International Society of Nephrology (ISN)
Kidney Care Network (KCN) applied this protocol across 4311 participants in Bolivia,
Brazil, South Africa, and Nepal. AKI was substantially more common in those identified via
the modified score (80.2%) than by clinical judgment alone (32.5%).135, 143

AF
T

Together, these studies support clinical utility and scalability of simplified risk-based
approaches for AKI screening in the community in low-resource settings. Incorporating such
tools into primary healthcare workflows could enhance the timeliness and equity of AKI
diagnosis, especially in under-served and high-risk communities.
Practice Point 2.1.2: The performance of electronic health record (EHR)-based AKI
risk models should be tested in the settings they will be deployed. Harmonizing
terminology and data structure within EHR systems and reassessment of performance
over time is needed to ensure predictive accuracy in a local setting and over time.

D

R

Recent advances in machine learning and augmented intelligence (AI) using EHR
data have expanded the development and testing of predictive models for AKI in acute care
settings.123, 132, 144-149 These techniques can identify key trends in variables collected from
EHRs, such as routinely collected vital signs, lab results, nursing assessments, clinical
conditions, and patient exposures, to predict the development of AKI. A systematic review
and meta-analysis by Cama-Olivares et al. identified 95 machine learning models for AKI
risk assessment, including models based on logistic regression, neural networks, random
forests, and gradient boosting.100 The pooled AUCs of these models for AKI prediction were
0.82 (95% CI: 0.80–0.84) upon internal validation and 0.78 (95% CI: 0.76–0.80) with
external validation, highlighting the deterioration in model performance that can occur when
models are applied in geographically and temporally distinct settings from their development.
Many machine learning and AI risk models display excellent specificity and negative
predictive value. However, these scores have often suffered from low positive predictive
values (<50%) which has, in part, limited wide-scale implementation.123, 132, 148 It is
anticipated that more predictive models for AKI will arise in the future.
The performance of EHR-based AKI risk models depends on the quality, structure,
and context of the data from which they are derived, making rigorous validation essential
prior to clinical use. Local calibration is a critical component of implementation because data
definitions, practice patterns, patient demographics, baseline AKI incidence, laboratory
measurement practices, and thresholds for interventions can vary substantially across
76

institutions, which may affect performance. Even previously externally validated models may
systematically over- or under-estimate AKI risk if these setting-specific factors are not
accounted for. Routine assessment of calibration-in-the-large and across risk strata enables
institutions to update model outputs to ensure predictions remain trustworthy.
Effective implementation also requires harmonization of terminology, definitions, and
data structures within EHR systems. Variability in coding practices, laboratory units,
timestamps, and clinical concepts (e.g., AKI definitions or medication exposure) can impair
model performance and limit their portability to new settings. Standardization using common
data models and interoperable vocabularies facilitates consistent model execution and
interpretation across sites.

D

R

AF
T

Ongoing monitoring and periodic reassessment of model performance are necessary
to maintain predictive accuracy over time. Changes in patient populations, clinical practices,
data capture, and treatment strategies can lead to model drift, reducing reliability if left
unaddressed. Continuous evaluation of discrimination (i.e., updating rankings of those with
and without AKI) and calibration (i.e., aligning the predictions to the observed incidence and
improving this over time), with timely updates when necessary are needed to ensure EHRbased AKI risk models retain accuracy in real-world clinical settings. Figure 6 illustrates a
series of steps before and after implementation of an AKI risk model that can help ensure it
operates more effectively.

77

AF
T
R

D

Figure 6 | Pre- and post-implementation pathways for the development, validation,
implementation, maintenance, and on-going evaluation of a clinical risk model (adapted
from Quickfall et al 2024.150 AKI, acute kidney injury; ICU, intensive care unit; IT,
information technology
2.2. Electronic AKI alerts
Recommendation 2.2.1: We recommend against delivering interruptive, creatininebased electronic alerts for AKI in isolation without systematic strategies for response in
routine clinical care of adults (1B).
This recommendation applies to interruptive electronic alerts triggered by changes in SCr
and implemented without an accompanying, structured response pathway. Electronic alert
systems require significant effort and information technology infrastructure to develop and
maintain. Evidence indicates that alerts may increase AKI recognition and have modest
effects on clinical processes of care but alone do not consistently improve patient outcomes
and may contribute to alert fatigue. If electronic AKI alerts are used, they should be
78

embedded within a comprehensive care strategy that includes clear clinical guidance,
accountability for response, and integration with multidisciplinary workflows aimed at timely
evaluation and management of AKI.
Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Electronic alerts to identify people with AKI can increase awareness of changes in
kidney function and prompt earlier recognition of AKI. However, in clinical trials where
SCr-based AKI alerts have been evaluated without standardized response protocols, clinical
decision support, or accountability structures, they have not been shown to improve patientcentered outcomes such as mortality, need for RRT, or recovery of kidney function.

AF
T

A meta-analysis of 13 randomized controlled trials (RCTs) comparing AKI alerts
versus no alerts in a total of 29,979 adults at risk of AKI showed no significant differences in
mortality (RR: 0.96; 95% CI: 0.91–1.02), progression to Stage 3 AKI (RR: 1.04; 95% CI:
0.79–1.36), need for RRT (RR: 1.02; 95% CI: 0.92–1.13), or development of MAKE
(adjusted OR: 0.83; 95% CI: 0.67–1.03; Supplementary Table S20). There were also no
differences in duration of AKI or chances of recovery of kidney function.

D

R

Potential harms of AKI include alert fatigue, workflow disruption, inappropriate or
delayed clinical decision-making, overtesting, and therapeutic inertia due to overreliance on
nonspecific SCr changes. Alerts based solely on SCr may also misclassify AKI, particularly
in people with CKD, fluctuating volume status, or following introduction of medications that
reduce GFR, leading to unnecessary interventions or consultations. Interruptive alerts can
impose cognitive burden on healthcare professionals and may divert attention from higherpriority clinical tasks, especially in resource-constrained environments. At a system level,
widespread implementation of isolated alerts consumes informatics and clinical resources
without clear evidence of benefit and may erode healthcare professionals trust in electronic
decision support tools.
Certainty of evidence
There is moderate certainty of evidence that, in adults, delivery of SCr-based
electronic alerts for AKI identification alone, without systematic care strategies, do not
improve AKI-related or other critical patient outcomes.151-156 The certainty of evidence was
downgraded for some methodological limitations.
Values and preferences
This recommendation reflects the value placed on patient-centered care and safety.
Patients are likely to prioritize care models that lead to timely, coordinated, and effective
responses to AKI risk over those that generate alerts without clear benefit, particularly when
79

alerts may contribute to unnecessary testing, treatment, or delays in other aspects of care.
Equity considerations were also important, as poorly designed alert systems may
disproportionately burden settings with limited staffing or informatics support, potentially
widening variation in care quality.

AF
T

Healthcare professionals and healthcare systems generally place greater value on
decision support tools that provide actionable information linked to recommendations that
are integrated into care processes, rather than on early detection alone when such detection
does not reliably translate into improved patient outcomes. Healthcare professionals and
healthcare systems prefer to avoid alert fatigue, workflow disruption, cognitive overload, and
false reassurance or inappropriate escalation, which may undermine electronic decision
support systems.
Resource use and costs
Significant information technology resources are required to develop, implement, and
maintain electronic AKI alerts. These systems may incur substantial costs related to
informatics infrastructure, software development, validation, ongoing maintenance,
healthcare professional training, and governance without corresponding reductions in AKIrelated morbidity, mortality, or resource utilization.

R

In addition to direct implementation costs, interruptive alerts may generate indirect
resource use through increased laboratory testing, consultations, documentation burden, and
workflow inefficiencies triggered by nonactionable or low-specificity alerts. Alert fatigue
may further diminish the efficiency of electronic clinical decision support systems (CDSS),
potentially reducing the effectiveness of other high-value alerts and leading to downstream
costs associated with missed or delayed responses to clinically important events.

D

Considerations for implementation
Implementation of this recommendation requires careful evaluation of existing EHR–
based AKI detection tools and the clinical contexts in which they are deployed. Healthcare
systems should assess whether current SCr-based alerts are linked to clearly defined response
pathways, including standardized evaluation, management recommendations, escalation
criteria, and accountability for follow-up. Where interruptive alerts are already in use without
such supports, deimplementation or modification should be considered.
When electronic AKI detection is pursued, it should be embedded within a broader,
systematic strategy for care. This may include integration with care bundles, clinical decision
support tools, or consultative services, as well as clear delineation of roles and
responsibilities among healthcare professionals. Local resources, staffing, and informatics
capacity should be considered, as effective implementation requires ongoing monitoring of
80

alert performance, healthcare professional engagement, and unintended consequences such as
alert fatigue or inequitable burden across care settings. Education and training of healthcare
professionals are important to ensure appropriate interpretation of AKI detection signals and
alignment with recommended care processes in the settings they are delivered.

AF
T

Rationale
The implementation of alerts is attractive because it theoretically provides a
mechanism for increasing the rapidity of recognition and response to AKI. However, there is
consistent evidence that electronic alerts for AKI based solely on SCr changes do not result
in improvements in patient-centered outcomes in routine clinical care. While such alerts may
increase recognition or documentation of AKI, detection alone does not ensure timely,
appropriate, or effective clinical responses, particularly in the absence of standardized
evaluation and management pathways.
Creatinine-based alerts are limited by delayed SCr kinetics, variable availability of
baseline SCr measurements, and susceptibility to false-positive or clinically inconsequential
triggers, which may reduce specificity and healthcare professional confidence. When
delivered in an interruptive manner, these alerts may contribute to alert fatigue, workflow
disruption, and desensitization to electronic decision support, potentially diminishing the
impact of other high-priority alerts.

R

The Work Group judged that the balance of benefits and harms is unfavorable for
isolated interruptive or non-interruptive alerts. Potential benefits related to earlier AKI
identification are uncertain and inconsistent, whereas potential harms—including inefficient
resource use, unnecessary testing or consultation, and erosion of healthcare professional
trust—are well recognized.

D

This recommendation does not preclude the use of AKI alerts when embedded within
multifaceted intervention strategies that include clear response pathways, education, and
ongoing evaluation.
2.3. Kidney functional testing
Practice Point 2.3.1: Assessment of kidney functional reserve before a potential
exposure may help to identify children and adults with an increased likelihood of
developing AKI.
Kidney functional reserve is the kidney’s capacity to increase GFR in response to
physiological stress.157 It has gained recognition as a measure for identifying people at
increased risk of AKI, even when baseline GFR appears normal. Multiple methods exist
to quantify kidney functional reserve, each with distinct advantages and limitations
81

depending on the clinical setting (Table 16). Oral protein loading is a physiological,
noninvasive approach suitable for stable outpatients or preoperative evaluation; however,
its variability in protein content and delayed GFR response can limit reproducibility.
Creatinine clearance, measured before and after protein loading, has traditionally been
used to detect kidney functional reserve; however, its reliance on accurate urine
collection limits its practicality.

D

R

AF
T

In a study by Husain-Syed et al., adults undergoing elective cardiac surgery
underwent preoperative kidney functional reserve assessment following a standardized
oral protein load.158 Although all participants had a normal resting GFR, those who
developed postoperative AKI were characterized by significantly reduced kidney
functional reserve. A kidney functional reserve ≤15 ml/min per 1.73 m² conferred an
11.8-fold increased risk of AKI, and the test had a high discrimination (AUC: 0.83) that
was greater than observed for traditional kidney function markers.158 In a prospective
study of hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients with normal pretransplant GFR,
Mancianti et al. demonstrated that lower kidney functional reserve was associated not
only with a higher risk of AKI but also with a reduced likelihood of kidney recovery.159
A kidney functional reserve <20% was associated with a 5-fold increase in the risk of
persistent abnormal kidney function. In children with prior kidney injury, such as those
recovering from hemolytic uremic syndrome and posterior urethral valves, and children
with congenital heart disease undergoing cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass,
lower kidney functional reserve predicted long-term renal sequelae, including
proteinuria.160

82

Table 16 | Select clinical methods to measure kidney functional reserve
Method
Mechanism
Advantages
Stimulated GFR through
dietary amino acids and
humoral mediators

Noninvasive,
physiologic

Intravenous amino acid

Direct stimulation of
GFR via systemic
humoral effects
Compare GFR before
and after protein load

Rapid onset (30–60
min), controlled dosage

Creatinine clearance
pre- and post-load
Cystatin C-based eGFR

Widely available,
traditional method

Less impacted by
muscle mass, quicker
than creatinine
clearance
Gold standard for GFR
measurement

Variable protein
content, slow onset (60–
180 min), dietary
restrictions
Requires intravenous
access, not all amino
acids are effective
Time-consuming (6+
hour), affected by
tubular secretion
Not yet validated in
clinical populations

Can be used in stable
patients; suitable
preoperatively or in
outpatient settings
Ideal for ICU/inpatient
settings; more consistent
dose
Requires close
monitoring and timed
urine collection
Useful in ICU or elderly
populations with low
muscle mass

Direct measurement of
Invasive, expensive, less
GFR with exogenous
practical clinically
markers before and after
protein load
AKI, acute kidney injury; (e)GFR, (estimated) glomerular filtration rate; ICU, intensive care

D
R

Inulin or iohexol
clearance

Cystatin C changes
post-protein load to
reflect GFR shift

Bedside application
notes

AF
T

Oral protein load (e.g.,
red meat, protein drink)

Limitations

83

Mostly in research
settings

Recommendation 2.3.1: We suggest using the furosemide stress test (FST) to assess the
risk of progression to Stage 3 AKI, including RRT in adults (2C) and children (2B) with
Stage 1 or 2 AKI who are euvolemic or hypervolemic.

AF
T

This recommendation places a high value on identification of people with AKI who are at
high risk of progressing to more severe AKI and could benefit from kidney-protective
strategies and/or planning for RRT. It is based on evidence that the FST can provide a
dynamic assessment of tubular function and help identify people who are at higher risk of
progression to Stage 3 AKI, including the need for RRT. Use of the FST may support earlier
risk stratification, closer monitoring, and timely escalation of kidney-protective or supportive
strategies. The test should be performed using standardized dosing and urine output
thresholds and interpreted in the context of overall clinical assessment.
Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
The primary benefit of applying the FST in people with early AKI is to improve risk
stratification for progression to more severe AKI, including need for RRT by providing a
functional assessment of tubular responsiveness. This information can support earlier
identification of people at high risk, closer monitoring, timely nephrology consultation,
patient counselling, and more proactive planning for supportive therapies such as RRT. The
FST is relatively simple, inexpensive, and can be performed at the bedside using medications
already familiar to healthcare professionals.161

D

R

Results from 12 studies show that the FST had low sensitivity and moderate
specificity for prediction of Stage 3 AKI, and moderate sensitivity and low specificity for
prediction of RRT in adults with critical illness or undergoing surgery (Supplementary Table
S21). In critically ill children, the FST has also been shown to be predictive of RRT.
However, different urine output cut-offs at 2 and 6 hours have been used (Supplementary
Table S22).162-165
Multimodal approaches that combine the FST with clinical assessments or other
biomarkers or risk scores have shown promise in identifying people at risk for AKI
progression or need for RRT, but a standardized protocol for combination management in
adults or pediatrics has yet to be widely validated.166-168
Potential harms include volume depletion, electrolyte abnormalities, or transient
worsening of kidney function if the test is applied inappropriately to people who are
hypovolemic or those without appropriate dosing and monitoring. In some cases, a poor urine
output response may prompt unnecessary escalation of care or anxiety if results are
overinterpreted outside the broader clinical context. There is also limited evidence on optimal
84

thresholds in certain pediatric subgroups. Overall, when restricted to people who are
euvolemic or hypervolemic and performed with standardized protocols and careful
monitoring, the anticipated benefits of improved prognostic assessment outweigh the
generally low and manageable risks.

AF
T

Certainty of evidence
There is moderate certainty of evidence that, for adults who are critically ill or
undergoing major surgery, the FST has low to moderate accuracy to predict AKI outcomes.
The overall certainty of evidence was based primarily on the moderate certainty of evidence
to predict RRT, which was downgraded for some inconsistency regarding specificity. There
was low certainty of evidence for incident AKI, stage 3 AKI, and for the determination of
low accuracy to predict death (low accuracy defined as 51%–75% sensitivity/specificity;
moderate accuracy defined as 76%–89% sensitivity/specificity).169-175 The certainty of
evidence for these outcomes was downgraded for inconsistency and/or imprecision, and for
possible publication bias regarding Stage 3 AKI. Without trial evidence, the overall certainty
of evidence for implementing the FST was downgraded, for indirectness, to low in adults.

R

There is high certainty of evidence that, for children in the ICU or undergoing major
surgery, the FST has low accuracy (as defined above) to predict incident AKI, Stage 3 AKI,
and mortality, with possible high test accuracy to predict RRT.162-165, 176-179 The evidence for
mortality was inconsistent and imprecise and RRT was evaluated by only a single, imprecise
study. Without trial evidence, the overall certainty of evidence for implementing the FST was
downgraded, for indirectness, to moderate in children.

D

Values and preferences
Patients, caregivers, and healthcare professionals generally place a high value on
early identification of worsening AKI, as progression to Stage 3. AKI is associated with
increased complications, need for RRT, mortality, longer stay in hospital, and higher
healthcare costs and resources. The FST aligns with these values by providing timely
prognostic information that may help guide monitoring intensity, discussions about
escalation of care, and anticipatory planning of care. Many well-informed patients and
families are likely to prefer a bedside test using a familiar medication rather than waiting for
clinical deterioration.
At the same time, some patients and healthcare professionals may place greater value
on avoiding additional interventions, potential side effects of diuretics, or tests that do not
directly alter treatment. Preferences may also vary in pediatric populations, where caregivers
may be more cautious about medication exposure. Given this variability, the strength of the
statement is Level 2, reflecting the importance of individualized discussion and shared
decision-making. Overall, most patients and healthcare professionals are likely to favor use
85

of the FST when the goal is improved prognostic clarity, provided it is applied judiciously
and in appropriate clinical contexts.
Resource use and costs
The FST has minimal direct costs, as it uses an inexpensive, widely available
medication and relies on routine bedside monitoring of urine output. It does not require
specialized equipment, advanced imaging, or additional laboratory testing beyond standard
AKI care, making it feasible in a wide range of clinical settings, including resource-limited
environments. Some additional nursing time may be required to administer the dose and
closely monitor urine output over the testing period.

AF
T

Use of the FST may lead to downstream resource implications by prompting closer
monitoring, earlier nephrology consultation, or escalation of care in people identified as high
risk, which could increase short-term resource utilization. However, improved risk
stratification may also enable more efficient allocation of resources by focusing intensive
monitoring and interventions on people most likely to progress. Overall, the low cost and
simplicity of the FST, combined with its potential to support more targeted use of healthcare
resources, suggest a favourable balance between costs and anticipated clinical value.

D

R

Considerations for implementation
The FST consists of a protocolized (1 mg/kg or 1.5 mg/kg) dose of intravenous
furosemide administered to people with Stage 1 or 2 euvolemic or hypervolemic AKI to
assess the risk of progression to more severe AKI (Figure 7).169 Results from prospective
observational studies and RCTs have demonstrated that adults who make a limited volume of
urine (e.g., <200 ml in the 2 hours after the receipt of intravenous furosemide) are more
likely to experience AKI progression to Stage 3 AKI (including the need for RRT) in the next
14 days.161, 171, 180, 181

86

AF
T

7 | Application of the furosemide stress test in the setting of early mild-tomoderate AKI in adults. In critically ill children, the furosemide stress test typically uses a
urine output criterion of <2 ml/kg/hour over 2 hours. AKI, acute kidney injury; i.v.,
intravenous; RRT, renal replacement therapy

R

Implementation of the FST requires careful patient selection to ensure it is used only
in children and adults with Stage 1 or 2 AKI who are euvolemic or hypervolemic, as use in
people who are hypovolemic may increase the risk of harm. Standardized protocols for
dosing, timing, and urine output measurement should be established to promote consistent
application and interpretation across care teams. Healthcare professionals, including nursing
staff, should be trained on the purpose of the test, appropriate monitoring, and recognition of
adverse effects, such as hypotension or electrolyte disturbances.

D

Interpretation of the FST should consider recent loop diuretic exposure. In people
already receiving high-dose loop diuretics or with suspected diuretic resistance, the
incremental diagnostic/prognostic value of the FST may be attenuated, and a lack of response
should be interpreted cautiously.
The results of the FST should be interpreted in the context of the overall clinical
picture and used as an adjunctive prognostic tool rather than a standalone determinant of
management decisions. Clear guidance is needed on how test results will inform downstream
actions. For example, non-response could trigger a prespecified bundle, including closer
urine output/serum creatinine monitoring, medication review for potential nephrotoxins,
hemodynamic reassessment, and (where appropriate) early preparation for RRT.
Consideration should also be given to pediatric-specific dosing, thresholds, and caregiver
communication. Ongoing evaluation of test use, safety, and impact on clinical decision
making can ensure appropriate and effective implementation in practice.

87

Rationale
Use of the FST to refine risk stratification of people at high or low risk for severe
AKI and RRT can facilitate clinical decision making, support counselling, facilitate planning
of scarce resources and enable timely preparation for RRT before the development of
complications, The test is feasible to use in appropriately selected people across diverse
clinical settings worldwide.
Recommendation 2.3.2: We suggest calculating kinetic estimated glomerular filtration
rate (KeGFR) in hospitalized adults with or at risk of AKI when an estimate of GFR
under non-steady-state conditions will affect clinical decision-making (2B).

AF
T

This recommendation acknowledges that traditional eGFR equations assume steady-state
kidney function and will provide misleading estimates of GFR in the setting of rapidly
changing SCr concentration. Kinetic estimated glomerular filtration rate (KeGFR)
incorporates the rate of change in SCr, providing a more physiologically appropriate
estimate of GFR during acute illness. When clinical decisions such as medication dosing,
nephrotoxic exposure, or escalation of care depend on an estimate of GFR, KeGFR may offer
additional, clinically relevant information to aid decision-making. Its use should be targeted
to situations in which nonsteady-state conditions are present and results are likely to
influence management.

D

R

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
The kinetic KeGFR is designed to estimate kidney function under non-steady-state
conditions by evaluating serial SCr measurements. Unlike traditional eGFR equations, which
assume steady-state kinetics, KeGFR accounts for rapid fluctuations in SCr that occur in
evolving AKI. Several equations, most notably the Chen formula, have been developed to
interpret SCr kinetics in dynamic settings.182
The main benefit of calculating KeGFR is improved estimation of kidney function
during nonsteady-state conditions, when SCr is changing and conventional eGFR equations
(that assume steady-state SCr) may be inaccurate. More accurate assessment of real-time
GFR can support safer and more appropriate clinical decisions, such as medication dosing,
avoidance of nephrotoxins, or use of contrast, potentially reducing preventable harm. KeGFR
may also enhance healthcare professional understanding of the trajectory and severity of
AKI, which can inform care planning.
KeGFR has moderate accuracy (defined as AUC of 0.76–0.85) to predict incident
AKI and may have high accuracy to predict the need for RRT in adult surgical or medical
patients at high risk of AKI (Supplementary Table S23).183-185 In critically ill adults with
88

sepsis, KeGFR combined with urine output criteria has been found to have high sensitivity
(defined as ≥90%) with low specificity (defined as 51%–75%) to predict incident AKI and
moderate accuracy to predict the need for RRT (Supplementary Table S24).186 Importantly,
studies have shown that KeGFR was more accurate at predicting AKI and need for RRT than
traditional eGFR equations that assume steady state of SCr.185, 187

AF
T

Potential harms are limited but include misinterpretation of results, particularly if
healthcare professionals are unfamiliar with the assumptions and limitations of KeGFR
calculations. Overreliance on KeGFR in isolation could lead to inappropriate decisions if
other clinical factors are not considered. There is also some uncertainty related to variability
in calculation methods and requirements for more than one, timed SCr measurement for the
calculation. Overall, when used selectively and interpreted within the broader clinical
context, the anticipated benefits of improved KeGFR estimation outweigh the low risk of
harm.
Certainty of evidence
There is high certainty of evidence that KeGFR has moderate accuracy (defined as
AUC of 0.76–0.85) to predict incident AKI in adults with medical or surgical risks for
AKI.185, 188, 189 The certainty of evidence to predict RRT, however, was low, downgraded for
sparseness. Without trial evidence, the overall certainty of evidence for implementing
KeGFR was downgraded, for indirectness, to moderate in adults.

D

R

There is low certainty of evidence that assigning adults to their worst prediction
category according to either KeGFR or KDIGO urine output criteria has high sensitivity
(defined as ≥90%), but low specificity (defined as 51%–75%), to predict incident AKI,
moderate accuracy (defined as AUC 0.76–0.85) to predict RRT, and low accuracy (defined
as AUC 0.51–0.75) to predict mortality.186 The certainty of evidence was downgraded for
being based on a single, large study that did not provide confidence intervals (estimates of
precision). Without trial evidence, the overall certainty of evidence for implementing KeGFR
or KDIGO urine output criteria categorization was downgraded, for indirectness, to very low
in adults.
Values and preferences
Well-informed patients and healthcare professionals generally place high value on
accurate assessment of kidney function when decisions carry meaningful risks. KeGFR
aligns with this value by providing a more appropriate estimate of GFR during acute changes
in kidney function, when traditional eGFR may be misleading. Healthcare professionals
value tools that can improve decision-making precision, particularly in people in the hospital
at complex or high-risk.

89

Preferences may vary due to unfamiliarity with KeGFR, concerns about the validity
of the calculation, or uncertainty about how to incorporate the estimate into routine care.
Some healthcare professionals may value simplicity and consistency with established eGFR
measures, and changes in SCr, especially when kinetic estimates are unlikely to change
management. For patients and caregivers, the value lies primarily in safer and more
individualized care rather than the specific calculation used. Overall, this Level 2 statement
reflects variability in preferences and emphasizes selective use when KeGFR is most likely
to inform clinical decisions.

AF
T

Resource use and costs
Calculating KeGFR has minimal direct costs, as it uses routinely collected SCr results
and patient characteristics already available in people in the hospital. Resource use may
include modest healthcare professional time for calculation or review and potential
information technology suppose if KeGFR is integrated into EHR systems. Targeted use of
KeGFR may lead to downstream cost implications by influencing medication dosing,
contrast use, or monitoring intensity, but these effects are primarily aimed at improving
safety rather than increasing utilization. Overall, the resource requirements are low, and the
potential for improved clinical decision-making suggests a favorable balance between costs
and anticipated benefit when used selectively.

R

Considerations for implementation
Implementation of KeGFR requires clear identification of clinical scenarios in which
non–steady state kidney function is present and the estimate is likely to influence
management. Several equations exist.190 The Chen formula is written as:
KeGFR=eGFRSS × SCrSS/SCrMean×
(1–24 × [ΔSCr/ΔTime (hr)]/[ΔSCrMax/ΔTimeMax]),

D

where SS indicates values at steady state (prior to AKI episode), SCrMean is the average of the
2 measurements of SCr being evaluated, ΔSCr/ΔTime is the change in SCr divided by the
period of time, in hours, between SCr measurements, and ΔSCrMax/ΔTimeMax is the
maximum theoretic change possible in SCr per day.190 Other formulas are available online.
Healthcare systems should agree on a standardized KeGFR formula and assumptions,
as multiple methods exist and inconsistent use may lead to confusion or misinterpretation. 190
Integration into EHR systems, with automated calculation using routinely available SCr data,
can reduce healthcare professional burden and improve reliability. The increasing availability
of POC SCr testing can facilitate clinical application in remote or low-resource settings.
Education and training are important to ensure healthcare professionals understand how
KeGFR differs from conventional eGFR, including its strengths, limitations, and appropriate
90

interpretation. Results should be presented as an adjunct to clinical judgment rather than a
standalone decision tool.

AF
T

Rationale
KeGFR has diagnostic and prognostic utility in children and adults under non–steadystate conditions when SCr is changing and conventional eGFR estimates are unreliable.
Estimating KeGFR may support clinical decision-making because an estimate of kidney
function during rapidly changing SCr can inform time-sensitive decisions such as drug
dosing, continuation or avoidance of potentially nephrotoxic medications, and the intensity of
monitoring or level of care. However, KeGFR estimates have important limitations and may
be less reliable when creatinine generation is changing (e.g., critical illness, malnutrition),
when volume status and fluid balance are fluctuating (dilution/concentration effects), or
when serum creatinine measurements are infrequent or delayed.
2.4. Biomarkers for AKI risk stratification
Practice Point 2.4.1: Baseline albuminuria (measured by urine albumin-to-creatinine
ratio [UACR or dipstick protein testing]) offers additional prognostic value to eGFR for
evaluating AKI risk in adults across various settings.

D

R

Measurement of baseline albuminuria, in addition to eGFR, provides valuable
prognostic information for identifying people at higher risk for AKI. Large observational
studies, including the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) cohort191, the Alberta
Kidney Disease Network192, and the Assessment, Serial Evaluation, and Subsequent
Sequelae in Acute Kidney Injury (ASSESS-AKI) study193, have consistently demonstrated
that elevated UACR and proteinuria by dipstick are independently associated with greater
risks of AKI and AKI requiring dialysis, even after accounting for baseline eGFR and
comorbidities. For example, in the ARIC cohort, including over 11,000 participants, the risk
of AKI rose progressively with increasing albuminuria and decreasing eGFR, with consistent
effects across age, sex, and race (Table 17).191
A meta-analysis of studies, including 1.28 million participants with baseline measures
of albuminuria and eGFR, confirmed these findings and highlighted that greater albuminuria
as well as lower eGFR both significantly elevated the risk of AKI, independent of diabetes
and hypertension (Figure 8).194 In an individual participant data meta-analysis of 49 cohorts,
lower eGFR and more severe albuminuria were each associated with higher rates of AKI.

91

AF
T

Figure 8 | Associations of CKD staging by eGFRcr and UACR categories and risks for
AKI in multivariable-adjusted analyses. Numbers reflect the adjusted hazard ratio
compared with the reference cell. Adjustment variables included age, sex, smoking status
(current, former, or never), systolic blood pressure, total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein
cholesterol, body mass index, use of antihypertensive medications, and a medical history of
diabetes, coronary heart disease, stroke, heart failure, atrial fibrillation, peripheral artery
disease, cancer, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, where relevant. The colors were
determined for each outcome separately using the following rule: the percentile shaded the
darkest green color corresponds to the proportion of cells in the grid without CKD (e.g., 6 of
35 cells with eGFR ≥60 ml/ min per 1.73 m2 and ACR. AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD,
chronic kidney disease; eGFRcr, estimated glomerular filtration rate by creatinine; UACR,
urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio

D

R

The association of albuminuria with AKI has been consistently identified in
numerous clinical settings and populations (Table 17). In people with stroke, proteinuria was
associated with a 5-fold increase in the risk of contrast-associated AKI.195 In the ICU setting,
albuminuria identified within 24 hours of admission predicted progression to severe AKI. 196
Preoperative albuminuria independently predicted AKI after cardiac and noncardiac
surgery,139, 197 while postoperative albuminuria also predicted subsequent AKI.198 Among
veterans undergoing coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery, higher preoperative
UACR was associated with an increased risk of AKI, a longer hospital stay, and higher
mortality.199 In people with CKD G3–G4 undergoing surgery, even mild dipstick proteinuria
increased the risk of AKI and RRT.200 A dose-dependent relationship, with increased AKI
risk emerging with even trace dipstick proteinuria has also been demonstrated in non-cardiac
surgery.201 The NARA-AKI study reinforced these findings in adults undergoing non-cardiac
surgery, showing a graded AKI risk based on dipstick proteinuria levels.202 Albuminuria
measurement is low-cost, non-invasive, and globally accessible, supporting its use as a
feasible, practical addition to risk stratification frameworks for AKI.

92

Table 17 | Select studies identifying albuminuria as a risk factor for AKI
Study author,
Population
Measurement type and
year
timing
1746 hospitalized adults
Preexisting dipstick
Hsu, 2008203
proteinuria
11,200
(ARIC cohort)

James, 2010192

~920,000 community
adults (Canada)

Huang, 2011204

1052 participants
undergoing cardiac
surgery
1198 participants
undergoing cardiac
surgery
294 children undergoing
cardiac surgery
153,767 participants
undergoing noncardiac
surgery
5347 adults with dialysisrequiring AKI

Molnar, 2012198

Wahl, 2018201
Lee, 2018205
Parr, 2018206
George 2015199

James, 2015194

Dialysis-requiring AKI

Preexisting proteinuria
associated with high AKI
risk
Graded association of
UACR with AKI,
independent of eGFR
Graded AKI risk with
increasing proteinuria,
independent of eGFR
Proteinuria independently
predicted AKI after
surgery
Postoperative
albuminuria predicted
AKI before SCr rise
No association found in
pediatric population
Dose-dependent AKI risk
with proteinuria,
independent of eGFR
Proteinuria associated
with reduced resolution
post-AKI
Higher odds of worsening
proteinuria post-AKI

UACR
(subclinical to severely
increased albuminuria)
Dipstick proteinuria and
UACR

AKI

Preoperative dipstick
proteinuria

AKI

Postoperative
albuminuria

Postoperative AKI

Preoperative UACR

Postoperative AKI

Preoperative dipstick
proteinuria

Postoperative AKI

Preadmission proteinuria

Non-resolution after AKI

90,614 AKI survivors vs.
controls

Dipstick proteinuria

New/progressive
proteinuria post-AKI

5968 VA patients
undergoing CABG

Preoperative UACR ≥30
mg/g

Postoperative AKI,
mortality

Meta-analysis of 1.28
million participants

UACR

AKI

AKI

D
R

Zappitelli, 2012198

Key findings

AF
T

Grams, 2010191

Outcome

93

Higher UACR linked to
increased risk of AKI,
hospital stay, mortality
Higher UACR associated
with increased AKI risk

Participants in the ICU
with sepsis

De novo albuminuria

Severe AKI

D
R

AF
T

De novo albuminuria
associated with severe
AKI progression
2015 participants who
Dipstick proteinuria/
CA-AKI, 1-year mortality 5x risk of CA-AKI;
Tao, 2017195
have had a stroke
UACR >30 mg/g
higher mortality with
proteinuria
1538 participants postUACR post-AKI
CKD progression
Post-AKI albuminuria
Hsu, 2020207
AKI
(3 months)
linked to faster CKD
progression
Nishimoto,
5168 participants
Preoperative dipstick
Postoperative AKI
Graded AKI risk by
undergoing noncardiac
proteinuria
dipstick level;
2020202
surgery
independent of
comorbidities
1546 participants with
Dipstick
Postoperative AKI, AKIProteinuria predicted AKI
Jiang, 2023208
CKD G3–G4
(trace to 3+)
RRT
and RRT; risk increased
(cardiac surgery)
with severity
AKI, acute kidney injury; ARIC, Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities; CABG, coronary artery bypass graft; CKD, chronic kidney disease;
CA-AKI, contrast-induced AKI; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; ICU, intensive care unit; RRT, renal replacement therapy; SCr,
serum creatinine; UACR, urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio; VA, Veterans Affairs
Neyra, 2014196

94

Recommendation 2.4.1: In acute care settings where children and adults are susceptible
to AKI, we suggest using biomarkers of kidney tubular stress or damage according to
their clinically validated and regulatory approved indication for the early identification
of people at risk of moderate or severe AKI, to inform targeted kidney-protective
strategies (adults: 2B; children: 2C).
Practice Point 2.4.2: Biomarkers of kidney stress (e.g., urine [TIMP-2]*[IGFBP7]) can
be used to assess the risk of moderate-to-severe AKI in critically ill adults, especially
within the first 12 hours of ICU admission or after high-risk events including major
surgery or sepsis.

AF
T

Practice Point 2.4.3: Biomarkers of kidney damage (e.g., urine NGAL) can be used to
identify children and adults at high risk of severe AKI in hospital settings.

R

Measurement of kidney stress and damage biomarkers in susceptible children and adults can
identify critically ill people at high risk for severe AKI who may benefit from early
application of targeted kidney-protective strategies. This recommendation and related
practice points (2.4.2. and 2.4.3) place a high value on delivering preventive strategies to
high-risk people to reduce the risk of progression to severe AKI and its complications. The
recommendation acknowledges that additional resource use (time and costs) is required to
implement these tests, and that a strategy of targeting preventive interventions to high-risk
people can be more efficient or appropriate than applying this care to all patients. To
maximize the value of additional biomarker testing, this should be done in conjunction with a
systematic strategy for providing kidney-protective interventions to patients identified at
increased risk in acute care settings.

D

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
The benefits of using validated biomarkers of kidney stress or damage arise from the
earlier identification of people at high risk of developing severe AKI, often before changes in
SCr or urine output are evident. Early risk recognition can support timely implementation of
targeted kidney-protective strategies, which may reduce AKI severity and associated
complications. Biomarkers may improve risk stratification beyond traditional clinical
measures. Large prospective cohort studies show that selected biomarkers of kidney stress or
damage can identify people at increased risk of developing severe AKI 12–24 hours earlier
than traditional markers such as SCr or urine output.32, 197, 209-212
[TIMP-2]*[IGFBP7]: Urinary concentrations of TIMP-2 and IGFBP7 have been
shown to increase in response to renal tubular stress from multiple causes including ischemia,
inflammation, drugs, and toxins before SCr rises or urine output decreases among people
who develop AKI.213-216 The value of urinary [TIMP-2]*[IGFBP7] to predict early
postoperative moderate-to-severe AKI has been demonstrated in numerous prospective,
95

observational studies of patients with critical illness, following major surgery, with septic
shock, and severe heart failure. RCTs have used measurement of this biomarker early after
surgery to identify high risk participants to target with AKI preventive interventions.

AF
T

RCTs that tested the effectiveness of kidney-protective strategies among adults with
elevated urinary [TIMP-2]*[IGFBP7] concentrations suggest that measurement of [TIMP2]*[IGFBP7] can be a valuable tool to identify people who can benefit from postoperative
application of kidney protection strategies (Supplementary Table S26). In the Prevention of
AKI (PrevAKI) trial, 276 adults with a urinary [TIMP-2]*[IGFBP7] ≥0.3 in the early
postoperative period following cardiac surgery were randomized to receive a kidneyprotective strategy based on recommendations from the KDIGO 2012 AKI Guideline versus
usual care.4 The study showed a reduced risk of any stage of AKI from 72% in the usual care
arm to 55% in the intervention arm (p=0.004). More specifically there was less Stage 2 and 3
AKI in those receiving the intervention (30%) than in the usual care arm (45%), p=0.009.4

R

The BigpAK RCT similarly evaluated a biomarker-based intervention to prevent AKI
after major surgery among critically ill participants who had undergone major abdominal
surgery.5 This trial identified participants with urinary [TIMP-2]*[IGFBP7] ≥0.3, who were
randomized to receive an intervention based on the KDIGO 2012 AKI Guideline kidneyprotective strategies or usual care. While there was no difference in overall AKI incidence
(any stage) or inpatient mortality, the study did demonstrate a reduction in Stage 2 and 3AKI,
shorter length of ICU stay, and a reduction in the cost of care for those randomized to the
intervention strategy.5 The BigpAK-2 trial repeated this approach in a larger, international,
validation RCT in 1180 high risk adults undergoing major surgery with elevated urinary
[TIMP-2]*[IGFBP7] ≥0.3. Application of a kidney-protective strategy consisting of
supportive measures and avoidance of nephrotoxins resulted in a significantly lower risk of
moderate-to-severe (Stage 2 or 3) AKI compared to standard care (22.3% vs. 14.4%),
without increasing adverse events.6, 217

D

Evidence review of 19 studies showed that urinary [TIMP-2]*[IGFBP7] >0.3 had
high sensitivity (90%) but poor specificity (53%) for predicting moderate or severe (Stage 2
or 3) AKI in adults,218 but lower sensitivity (68%) to predict any incident AKI
(Supplementary Table S27). At a higher cut-off of >2.0, sensitivity was poor (33%) but
specificity was high (95%) for predicting moderate to severe AKI in adults. Evidence review
of 5 pediatric studies found that urinary [TIMP-2]*[IGFBP7] had moderate accuracy (AUC
0.79) to predict moderate or severe AKI in children (Supplementary Table S28).16
There are several biomarkers of tubular damage that can be detected in urine and
plasma prior to changes in SCr and urine output, which have been associated with an
increased risk of impending AKI; however few have received regulatory approval for entry
into clinical use (Table 4).

96

NGAL: The 25-kDa monomer of NGAL is produced by renal tubular epithelial cells,
and increased concentrations in urine or plasma serve as indicators of renal tubular injury. 219
Urine NGAL is more specific for detection and evaluation of AKI than plasma NGAL and
has been U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) cleared as an adjunctive risk assessment
tool for moderate-to-severe AKI in children who are critically ill in the ICU.220 In Europe, it
is European Conformity (CE)-marked for early detection and evaluation of AKI in hospital
settings.

AF
T

Urine NGAL has been shown to predict progression to Stage 2 or 3 AKI and need for
RRT in children and adults. Urine NGAL can be combined with other markers of GFR to
identify those at highest risk for the most severe forms of AKI. For example, Goldstein et al.
demonstrated that the combination of urine NGAL and plasma cystatin C collected after the
start of cardiopulmonary bypass provided a more accurate prediction of severe (Stage 2 or 3)
AKI within 7 days compared to a rise in SCr of ≥50%.221
Evidence review of 35 studies with 8374 participants showed that urine NGAL has
moderate sensitivity (77%) and specificity (81%) to predict incident AKI in adults
(Supplementary Table S29).218 Six of these studies reported that urine NGAL had low
sensitivity (68%) and moderate specificity (83%) to predict Stage 2 or 3 AKI (sensitivity
68%, specificity 83%) and need for RRT (sensitivity 65%, specificity 89%) in adults. Across
28 pediatric studies with 3459 participants, urine NGAL had moderate accuracy to predict
AKI (sensitivity 75%, specificity 85%), severe AKI (AUC 0.80), need for RRT (AUC 0.78),
as well as high accuracy for prediction of mortality (AUC 0.87) in children (Supplementary
Table S30).16

D

R

KIM-1: This glycoprotein is produced by proximal tubular cell and is released into
urine after tubular cell damage. Urine KIM-1 received U.S. FDA approval as a biomarker
only for use in a research context, specifically as part of a panel of nephrotoxicity biomarkers
for use in preclinical drug development. The evidence review found that, in adults, urine
KIM-1 had moderate sensitivity (76%) and specificity (79%) for early detection of AKI (14
studies218 of 2993 participants; Supplementary Table S31)) and, in children, low accuracy
(AUC 0.70) to predict AKI (12 studies with 1593 participants16) and Stage 2 to 3 AKI (AUC
0.73), but moderate accuracy, from a single RCT, to predict need for RRT (AUC 0.76) and
death (AUC 0.78; Supplementary Table S32).
L-FABP: This biomarker is excreted into urine after tubular cell damage. The
evidence review found that L-FABP had low sensitivity (70%) and moderate specificity
(81%) to predict AKI in adults (sensitivity 10 studies;218 Supplementary Table S33)) and
moderate accuracy to predict AKI (AUC 0.80) and Stage 2 to 3 AKI (AUC 0.85) in children
(5 studies;16 Supplementary Table S34). L-FABP has been approved as a clinical biomarker
for AKI in Japan, where it is routinely available in clinical laboratories.

97

Limiting use to biomarkers with demonstrated clinical validity and regulatory
approval ensures reliable interpretation and performance in appropriate patient populations. 2,
4-6 When applied in acute care settings where AKI risk is high, these biomarkers can enhance
risk stratification, support more proactive care, and improve alignment of preventive
interventions with patient risk. No single biomarker has utility for the prediction or early
detection of AKI across all clinical settings (Table 4).

AF
T

Potential harms from biomarker measurement include false-positive results that may
lead to unnecessary monitoring, interventions, patient and family anxiety, as well as falsenegative results that could provide false reassurance if over-relied upon. In the absence of
clearly defined action pathways, positive biomarker results (like SCr alerts) may also prompt
over-escalation of care (e.g., additional monitoring or higher-acuity placement) without clear
benefit. Additional considerations include variability in biomarker performance across
populations and settings, and the risk of inappropriate use outside validated indications.
However, when biomarkers are used selectively, interpreted in conjunction with clinical
assessment, and applied according to approved indications, the anticipated benefits of earlier
and more targeted prevention strategies are judged to outweigh the generally low and
manageable risks related to imperfect performance.

D

R

Certainty of evidence
The certainty of evidence for implementing urinary [TIMP-2]*[IGFBP7] testing in
adults undergoing major surgery is moderate based on RCT data.2, 4-6 RCTs evaluating
urinary [TIMP-2]*[IGFBP7]-based care were downgraded for methodological issues due to
lack of blinding, but were consistent and provided a precise estimate to reduce risk of Stage
2–3 AKI. Other populations (e.g., people in the ICU) have not been systematically evaluated;
thus, the certainty of evidence is downgraded for other populations. Further supporting the
recommendation, overall, studies provided low certainty of evidence of predictive accuracy
for Stage 2–3 AKI in adults.218 These studies had some methodological limitations and
provided imprecise estimates of test accuracy.
No RCTs of urine [TIMP-2]*[IGFBP7] testing have been conducted in children.
Regarding diagnostic accuracy, the certainty of evidence in children is moderate that [TIMP2]*[IGFBP7] has low to moderate accuracy (defined as AUC between 0.76 and 0.85) to
predict AKI-related outcomes.16 The certainty of evidence was downgraded for
methodological limitations of the studies to predict incident AKI and Stage 2–3 AKI, with
imprecision regarding prediction of RRT and mortality. However, without trial evidence in
children, the certainty of evidence for implementing urinary [TIMP-2]*[IGFBP7] testing in
children was downgraded to low.
RCTs have not evaluated implementing urine NGAL testing in either adults or
children. In adults, there is moderate certainty of evidence that urine NGAL has low-tomoderate sensitivity and moderate specificity to predict AKI outcomes (low sensitivity or
98

specificity defined as 51-75% and moderate sensitivity or specificity defined as 76%–
89%).218 The certainty of evidence was downgraded for methodological limitations of the
studies. Estimates of test accuracy to predict Stage 2–3 AKI and RRT were imprecise. In
children, there is moderate certainty of evidence that urine NGAL has moderate accuracy to
predict AKI outcomes and mortality.16 The certainty of evidence was downgraded for
methodological limitations of the studies. Without trial evidence, the overall certainty of
evidence for implementing urine NGAL testing was downgraded to low due to indirectness
for adults and low for children.

AF
T

RCTs have not evaluated implementing urinary KIM-1 testing in either adults or
children. In adults, there is moderate certainty of evidence that urinary KIM-1 has moderate
accuracy (as defined above) to predict incident AKI, but no evidence regarding prediction of
more severe AKI. In children, there is also moderate certainty of evidence regarding test
accuracy of urinary KIM-1.16 Specifically, there is moderate certainty of evidence for
prediction of incident AKI and mortality, due to study limitations, but there is only low
certainty of evidence for prediction of Stage 2–3 AKI or RRT (further downgraded for
imprecision). Without trial evidence, the overall certainty of evidence for implementing
urinary KIM-1 testing was downgraded to low due to indirectness for both children and
adults.

R

RCTs have not evaluated implementing urinary L-FABP testing in either adults or
children. In adults, there is moderate certainty of evidence that urinary L-FABP has low
sensitivity and moderate specificity (as defined above) to predict incident AKI in adults, in
addition to moderate accuracy to predict incident AKI or severe AKI in children. The
certainty of evidence was downgraded for methodological limitations. Without trial evidence,
the overall certainty of evidence for implementing urinary L-FABP testing was downgraded
to low due to indirectness for both children and adults.

D

Values and preferences
Well-informed patients, caregivers, and healthcare professionals generally place a
high value on early recognition of risk, particularly when progression to severe AKI may
lead to significant morbidity, need for RRT, or prolonged hospitalization. The use of
validated biomarkers of kidney stress or damage in combination with clinical assessment
aligns with this value by offering earlier and more objective information than traditional
measures alone, supporting timely and proactive kidney-protective care in high-risk acute
care settings.
Preferences may vary regarding the use of additional testing, especially if results will
not clearly change management or if there is uncertainty about interpretation. Some patients
and caregivers may prioritize minimizing tests, costs, or anxiety associated with abnormal
results. Healthcare professionals may also differ in their comfort and familiarity with

99

biomarker-guided strategies. These variations in values and preferences support a Level 2
statement, emphasizing selective use according to validated indications.

AF
T

Resource use and cost
Use of additional biomarkers entails additional direct costs related to setting up the
laboratory assays as an in-house test to provide timely results, as well as per test costs. These
costs vary by biomarker, testing frequency, and local laboratory infrastructure, and are higher
than those of conventional kidney function tests. Implementation may also require
investment in healthcare professional education, protocol development, and integration of
results into clinical workflows or EHRs to ensure appropriate use of results. In high-resource
settings, where laboratory infrastructure, regulatory approval, and supply chains are
established, biomarker testing can be integrated into routine workflows with predictable pertest costs and rapid turnaround times. In low-resource settings, limited access to biomarker
assays, higher relative costs, lack of analyzer platforms, or longer turnaround times may
substantially increase resource burden or make testing not feasible. In such contexts, routine
biomarker use could divert resources from other essential aspects of care without clear added
value. Selective or restricted use, when available, may be more appropriate, and reliance on
clinical assessment and conventional tests may remain the primary strategy.

D

R

Biomarker-guided risk stratification may lead to more efficient use of healthcare
resources by enabling targeted kidney-protective strategies in people most likely to benefit,
while avoiding unnecessary interventions in those at lower-risk. Earlier identification of
people at risk of severe AKI has the potential to reduce downstream costs associated with
AKI complications; however, findings from cost-effectiveness analyses have been highly
uncertain.222 The BigpAK trial reported a reduction in overall cost of care following
implementation of [TIMP-2]*[IGFBP7] measurement through improved AKI care processes
and shorter lengths of stay.5 Thus, while upfront testing costs are higher, emerging evidence
suggests that selective use according to validated and approved indications may result in a
favorable balance between resource use and clinical value in some settings (e.g., following
major surgery).
Cost-effectiveness is likely to depend on baseline AKI risk/incidence in the tested
population and whether biomarker results are linked to an actionable intervention and thus
may vary substantially across clinical settings and health systems.
Considerations for implementation
Accessibility and availability of biomarker tests are important considerations for
implementation, particularly across settings with varying resource levels.223 In high-resource
settings, these tests may be readily available with rapid turnaround times and electronic
integration, facilitating timely risk stratification and protocolized kidney-protective
responses. In contrast, limited laboratory infrastructure, higher costs, and lack of regulatory

100

approval restricts availability in low-resource settings, making routine or widespread use
challenging.
Implementation strategies should therefore be tailored to local capacity; prioritizing
biomarker use in clinical scenarios where the added prognostic value is greatest and where
results can realistically influence management. Clear protocols should define appropriate
indications, timing of testing, and thresholds for action to ensure biomarkers are used
consistently and inform management. Healthcare professionals and healthcare teams should
receive training on the appropriate interpretation of biomarker results and their limitations,
emphasizing biomarkers as adjuncts to, rather than replacements for, clinical assessment.

AF
T

To implement biomarker testing safely, centers should predefine eligibility criteria
and a targeted testing strategy (i.e., who is tested, when, and how often) focusing on high-risk
populations to avoid indiscriminate testing and over-response. Biomarker results should be
linked to a standardized kidney-protective management strategy (e.g., closer urine output
/SCr monitoring, medication review/avoidance of nephrotoxins where feasible, and
hemodynamic/volume reassessment, with early nephrology consultation or RRT
preparedness when appropriate). Because access and performance may vary across settings
and patient subgroups, programs should also evaluate availability and test performance
across key subgroups to support transportability and avoid widening disparities.

R

Rationale
There is evidence that selected biomarkers of kidney stress or damage can identify
people at increased risk of developing severe AKI 12–24 hours earlier than traditional
markers and can provide opportunities to implement targeted kidney-protective strategies and
improve outcomes. It is essential that appropriate biomarkers are chosen for specific clinical
settings and interpreted accordingly.

D

This recommendation is supported by evidence that tubular stress/damage biomarkers
can identify people at increased risk of subsequent severe AKI at an earlier stage, and by a
limited body of randomized trial data showing that selection of patients based on biomarker
criteria followed by application of kidney-protective interventions can reduce AKI in
selected surgical populations; however, evidence that care delivery with biomarker testing
versus without improves patient-centered outcomes is lacking. Knowledge of effective
implementation strategies in broader non-surgical settings remain limited.
2.5. Tests for AKI etiology and diagnostic evaluation
Recommendation 2.5.1. In adults with AKI, we suggest urine microscopy as part of the
diagnostic evaluation, particularly when the etiology is unclear or intrinsic kidney
disease is suspected, as urine sediment examination can provide diagnostic and
prognostic information that complements clinical assessment and other laboratory
studies (2D).
101

This recommendation places a high value on diagnostic accuracy, clinical insight, and
avoidance of unnecessary or inappropriate interventions in the evaluation of AKI. Urine
microscopy is a noninvasive, low-cost test that can provide direct information about kidney
pathology and prognosis, which can influence patient management. The Level 2 strength of
this statement reflects the fact that the value of urine microscopy will differ depending on
individual patient circumstances and that access to healthcare professionals trained in urine
microscopy may be limited in many centers.

AF
T

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Urine microscopy is a diagnostic tool used to examine concentrated urine sediment to
identify features suggestive of acute tubular injury (ATI), glomerular disease, acute
interstitial nephritis (AIN), and crystal-associated AKI, thereby refining the differential
diagnosis of AKI. Specific sediment findings may also provide prognostic information, as
they have been associated with AKI severity and risk of progression. Identification of
diagnostic sediment features may prompt earlier targeted evaluation or treatment, including
appropriate use of serologic testing, avoidance of unnecessary therapies, or consideration of
kidney biopsy.

R

Granular casts have moderate sensitivity and high specificity to predict AKI, and
100% specificity and 100% positive predictive value for prediction of ATI. Granular casts
were associated with a ≥50% increase in creatinine from baseline at discharge. A study in
661 participants who underwent noncardiac surgery and were admitted to the ICU showed
that urine microscopy scores based on epithelial cells, renal tubular epithelial cells, and
granular casts had high specificity with low sensitivity for ATI (Supplementary Table
S35).224

D

The principal limitations of urine microscopy relate to access to nephrologists with
expertise in urine sediment evaluation, operator dependence, and variability in expertise,
which reduce reproducibility and diagnostic accuracy. Misinterpretation of urine sediment
findings may lead to diagnostic uncertainty or inappropriate downstream testing and
treatment if results are not integrated with the overall clinical context. Given its absence of
procedural risk, the potential clinical benefit is considered meaningful, particularly in people
with unexplained AKI or suspected intrinsic kidney disease.
Certainty of evidence
Based on 3 studies conducted in adults, each evaluating different features or scoring
systems based on urine microscopy, there is low certainty of evidence that the urinary
microscopy score in people undergoing noncardiac surgery admitted to the surgical ICU has
high specificity to predict that patients will not develop Stage 2–3 AKI;224 very low certainty
of evidence that muddy brown granular casts have moderate sensitivity and high specificity
102

for predicting ATI in people with Stage 2–3 AKI;225 and very low certainty of evidence that
in people with AKI, absence of urine eosinophils has high specificity to predict that people
do not have acute interstitial nephritis.226 The certainty of evidence for each measure was
downgraded for sparseness of data; although, both studies evaluating urinary microscopy
score and urinary eosinophils were large. Because there is no trial evidence about the clinical
effect of implementing urine microscopy, the overall certainty of evidence was downgraded
to very low for each urine microscopy measure in adults.

AF
T

Values and preferences
Urine microscopy carries minimal risk and thus well-informed patients and healthcare
professionals are likely to place a high value on its use when it may inform diagnosis,
prognosis, and management. Potential downstream testing or treatment decisions prompted
by urine microscopy findings are expected to be guided by clinical judgment, thereby
limiting unnecessary interventions. There is variability in expertise, availability, and
interpretive skill across clinical settings. Thus, its value depends on appropriate performance,
interpretation, and integration with the broader clinical picture. Overall, most patients and
healthcare professionals are expected to favor the use of urine microscopy when performed
and interpreted appropriately, given its minimal burden and potential to improve the
understanding of the cause and likely course of AKI.

R

Resource use and costs
Urine microscopy is a low-cost diagnostic test that can be performed using existing
laboratory infrastructure in most healthcare settings. Required resources are limited to
standard microscopy equipment and services of trained personnel for specimen preparation
and interpretation. It is, however, labor intensive because a skilled nephrologist is usually
needed to analyze a fresh urine sample. However, when the etiology of AKI is unclear or an
intrinsic kidney disease is suspected, the cost is generally small relative to the value of the
information it can provide.

D

Urine microscopy may help optimize downstream resource use by guiding more
targeted diagnostic testing, avoiding unnecessary interventions, and supporting timely
management decisions. However, availability of trained personnel may be limited in some
institutions. Also, in some countries, special certification is needed to record the results but
overall the additional resource requirements of the test are modest.
Considerations for implementation
Successful implementation of this recommendation requires adequate healthcare
professional or laboratory expertise in identifying and interpreting the urinary sediment.
Training healthcare professionals in microscopy technique and interpretation is important to
ensure accurate and reproducible results. Standardization of protocols and reporting of
sediment evaluation may facilitate more consistent interpretation by healthcare professionals.
In many settings local expertise and access to nephrology services is limited, which presents
103

a barrier to routine incorporation into clinical evaluation for AKI, particularly in less
resourced and remote centers. Abnormal findings from initial urine dipstick testing may
identify people in whom further evaluation with urine microscopy evaluation is warranted.
When access is limited, integration into clinical workflow should emphasize selective use,
focusing on people in whom the etiology of AKI is unclear or an intrinsic kidney disease is
suspected. Where nephrology expertise is limited, institutions may consider standardized labbased protocols with periodic competency assessment and structured reporting.
Because urine microscopy (including urine microscopy scoring) is low-cost, it may be
particularly useful in resource-limited settings; however, test performance depends on trained
personnel and standardized reporting, and automated urinalysis systems may miss key
sediment findings relevant to tubular injury.227

AF
T

The strength of recommendation is Level 2 reflecting the anticipated variation in
healthcare professional experience, availability of institutional resources, and patient-specific
value of the test.

D

R

Rationale
Urine microscopy allows direct visualization of urinary sediment and can provide
important insights into the underlying pathophysiology of AKI (Table 18). Specific sediment
findings, such as renal tubular epithelial cells and granular casts, support a diagnosis of
ATI.228 Findings such as dysmorphic red blood cells or red blood cell casts suggest
glomerular disease, and white blood cells or white blood cell casts may support AIN,
prompting targeted diagnostic evaluation and consideration of kidney biopsy.229 The absence
of pathologic findings (i.e., a bland sediment) may support a hemodynamic-mediated
process, although it does not exclude early or evolving structural injury. Although supporting
studies were conducted in adults, the pathophysiologic basis for urine sediment findings is
not age dependent. The cellular and cast elements that reflect ATI, glomerular disease, or
interstitial nephritis are shared across pediatric and adult populations.
Manual urine microscopy should be performed by trained personnel using
standardized procedures to ensure reliable results for patient care.230 Limitations include
operator dependence and variability in expertise.231 Automated urinalysis is time saving,
standardized, and commonly used due to efficiency and cost, but have not been demonstrated
to be sufficiently reliable to identify ATI, glomerulonephritis, or interstitial nephritis.
Therefore, healthcare professionals are advised not to rely solely on laboratory-reported
urinalysis for clinical diagnosis and decision-making, although findings on an initial
urinalysis may prompt further evaluation by manual urine microscopy.

104

AF
T

Table 18 | Urine sediment and associated kidney injury syndromes
Syndrome
Urine sediment
Urine dipstick
Hemodynamic-mediated
Bland, hyaline casts, few finely granular casts,
−/+ protein
(prerenal) AKI
occasional RTECs
RTECs, RTEC casts, course granular casts, “muddy
Acute tubular injury (ATI)
−/+ protein
brown” casts
Acute interstitial nephritis
WBCs, WBC casts, RTECs, RTEC casts, RBCs,
−/+ protein,+/++ LE,
(ATN)
occasional RBC casts
+/++ blood
Dysmorphic RBCs (acanthocytes), isomorphic
+/++ protein, ++/+++
Nephritic syndrome
RBCs, WBCs, RBC casts, WBC casts
blood
Lipid droplets, oval fat bodies, birefringent Maltese
Nephrotic syndrome
+++/++++ protein
cross, lipid laden casts, cholesterol crystals
Various endogenous or drug-related crystals,
Crystalline nephropathy
RTECs, RBCs, WBCs, some WBCs engulfing
−/+ blood, −/+ LE
crystals
Swollen RTECs with cytoplasmic vacuoles,
Osmotic nephropathy
−/+ protein
RTEC/granular casts
LE, leukocyte esterase; RBCs, red blood cells; RTECs, renal tubular epithelial cells; WBCs, white
blood cells. Reproduced from Cavanaugh 1, et al. 2019.230

Practice Point 2.5.1: Muddy brown granular casts and renal tubular epithelial cells can
assist in distinguishing acute tubular injury (ATI) from hemodynamic-mediated AKI
and predict progression to severe AKI.

R

Muddy brown granular casts and renal tubular epithelial cells (RTEC) have long been
associated with ATI. In a biopsy-anchored study, granular casts were consistently observed
in 49 participants with histologically confirmed acute tubular necrosis (ATN) the
histopathologic correlate of ATI, with 100% specificity and positive predictive value, and
with moderate sensitivity of 78% for a biopsy diagnosis of ATN (Supplementary Table
S36).225

D

A number of standardized scoring systems (urine microscopy or sediment scores)
have been developed to quantify casts and RTECs and help with diagnosis and
prognostication of AKI. Perazella et al. developed and examined the utility of a urinary
scoring system based on RTECs and granular casts in 231 participants with hospital-acquired
AKI.228 The likelihood ratios for ATI increased as the number of granular casts or RTECs
(and score) increased. In participants with a pretest diagnosis of ATI, the presence of any
casts or RTEC (urine sediment score ≥2) had a positive predictive value of 100% for a final
diagnosis of ATI. In participants with a pretest diagnosis of “prerenal” AKI, the lack of
granular casts or a urine sediment score of 0 had a negative predictive value of 91% for a
final diagnosis of “prerenal” AKI. Using an AKI scoring index developed by Chawla et al., a
score ≥2 (reflecting at least 1 cast or RTEC seen but in <10% of low power fields) predicted
non-recovery of kidney function.232 A modified score by Perazella, was used to evaluate the
outcome of worsening AKI (higher stage, RRT requirement, or death) in 197 participants
with AKI. When compared to a urinary score of 0, a score of ≥3 was associated with a 7-fold
greater adjusted risk of worsening AKI (risk ratio [RR]: 7.3; 95% CI: 3.8–9.6). In a study of
105

661 participants following cardiac surgery, a urine microscopy score ≥3 at 6 hours after ICU
admission carried high specificity (98%) but low sensitivity (5%) for severe (Stage 2 or 3)
AKI.224 Moreover, elevated scores were independently associated with greater odds of
postoperative complications and longer ICU stay.
In a prospective cohort of non-ICU hospitalized adults at moderate-to-high risk of
AKI, an admission urine microscopy score (UMS) provided a structured measure of tubular
injury (UMS ≥2 identifying ‘subclinical AKI’) and showed good discrimination for clinical
AKI within 48 hours (AUC ~0.84), with higher UMS also associated with subsequent RRT
use and mortality.232

AF
T

Urine microscopy demonstrates prognostic utility over clinical assessment alone. Hall
et al. evaluated urine microscopy score and newer urine biomarkers in 249 hospitalized
participants with AKI. The adjusted risk of the primary outcome of worsened AKI or death
was approximately 3 times greater in participants in the higher versus the lowest groups of
urinary biomarker levels (NGAL, KIM-1, and IL-18) as well as urine microscopy score. Net
reclassification significantly improved with the addition of both newer biomarkers or urine
microscopy to clinical variables, suggesting that urine microscopy may be as useful as newer
biomarkers to improve risk stratification of AKI.
Practice Point 2.5.2: Urine eosinophil testing has low sensitivity and moderate
specificity, limiting its diagnostic value particularly for excluding a diagnosis of acute
interstitial nephritis (AIN).

D

R

Acute interstitial nephritis is a cause of AKI characterized by an inflammatory
infiltrate in the kidney interstitium.233 While AIN has multiple potential etiologies, drugs are
the most common causes (70%), with antibiotics accounting for 30%–50% of cases.233-235
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) have also been associated with AIN and appear to play a role
in increasing the risk of immune-check point inhibitor-associated AIN.235, 236 AIN is
important to diagnose because it is a common, often reversible cause of AKI where early
recognition and targeted treatment can prevent permanent kidney damage.
In an early study, 65 of 470 (16%) participants with AKI were reported to have urine
eosinophils on examination of the urinary sediment.237 Of these 65 participants, only 9 (14%)
had a final diagnosis of AIN. The incidence of AIN was higher in those with >10% urine
eosinophils (4 of 7 participants) and AIN was diagnosed in 4 of 10 participants with urine
eosinophils >5%. In the ensuing 3 decades, several case series suggested that elevated urine
eosinophils might be considered diagnostic of AIN, although thorough diagnostic accuracy
studies to confirm this hypothesis have been lacking. In 2013, a retrospective case series of
566 participants with urine eosinophils measured within 7 days of a kidney biopsy showed
that 91 participants had AIN.226 When looking at the test performance of both a 1% and 5%
urine eosinophil cutoff, a cutoff of 1% provided a sensitivity of 31% and specificity of 68%
106

for the diagnosis of AIN. When using the 5% cutoff, the sensitivity was lower at 20% and
specificity was higher at 91% (Supplementary Table S37). There was no meaningful
difference in operating characteristics when these same cutoffs were applied to cases with
ATN. Thus, even at a cutoff of 5%, absence of urine eosinophils has limited ability to rule
out AIN from other forms of AKI, limiting their utility as a diagnostic test for AIN,
particularly for excluding the diagnosis in routine clinical care.226, 238
Urine eosinophils are neither necessary nor sufficient to diagnose AIN and routine
testing for urine eosinophils for the diagnosis of AIN is not advisable. When clinical
suspicion of AIN is high, a definitive evaluation (including kidney biopsy when appropriate)
and timely initiation of indicated therapy should not be delayed.

AF
T

Practice Point 2.5.3: Urinary inflammatory cytokines may be useful in distinguishing
AIN from other causes of AKI or AKD in adults.

D

R

Emerging evidence indicates that detection of inflammatory cytokines in urine may
help distinguishing AIN from other mechanisms of AKI. Among people with AIN diagnosed
by kidney biopsy, both urinary IL-9 and urinary TNF-α levels were higher in those with AIN
compared with other types of AKI, with an AUC of 0.83 (95% CI: 0.73–0.92).239, 240
Chemokine C-X-C motif ligand (CXCL) 9 (CXCL9), an interferon gamma induced
chemokine involved in lymphocyte chemotaxis, has also been evaluated as a urinary
biomarker of AIN.241 In preclinical and human studies CXCL9 levels were higher in people
with kidney biopsy proven AIN, with nearly 4-fold higher microRNA tissue expression of
the chemokine when AIN was present. In the original cohort of 204 participants with kidney
biopsies, of whom 15% had biopsy-proven AIN, participants with urine CXCL9 levels in the
highest quartile had an adjusted OR of 6.0 (95% CI: 1.8–20.0) for AIN when compared to
those in the lowest quartile. In a validation cohort, urinary CXCL9 provided an AUC of 0.94
(95% CI: 0.86–1.00) for the diagnosis of AIN with levels being over 7.5 fold higher in
participants with AIN compared to those with other biopsy findings (p=0.00001).241
In a longitudinal study of participants with AIN, there was a statistically significant

decrease in 6-month GFR in participants with urinary IL-9 levels above the median of 0.66
ng/g compared with those with lower IL-9 values (p=0.005) among participants who did not
receive corticosteroids.242 The study also showed that corticosteroid use was associated with
higher 6-month GFR compared to no corticosteroids only when urinary IL-9 >0.66 ng/g
(p=0.05), suggesting that urinary IL-9 levels can help identify people who might benefit from
corticosteroids.242 Elevated urinary TNF-α was also found to be associated with AIN over
other types of AKI among participants on immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy [AUC: 0.81;
95% CI: 0.62−1.00).243 Urinary cytokines including interferon-inducible T cell alpha
chemoattractant (I-TAC)/CXCL11 (I-TAC/CXCL11), CXCL10, interleukin-6 (IL-6), and
monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) have also shown potential diagnostic value in
diagnosing AIN.244 Detection of elevated concentrations of urinary cytokines may change
107

management by prompting kidney biopsy and/or corticosteroid treatment for AIN; however,
clinical implementation of this approach depends on availability of local laboratory assays
and test validation. In addition to limited availability and lack of assay standardization,
urinary cytokine levels may be confounded by other inflammatory kidney diseases and
intercurrent infection (e.g., urinary tract infection) and therefore should be interpreted in
clinical context.
Practice Point 2.5.4: Urine chemistries, including fractional excretion of sodium (FeNa)
and fractional excretion of urea (FeUrea) should be reserved for use in differentiating
hemodynamic-mediated (prerenal) AKI from ATI in selected clinical scenarios and
groups of children and adults with AKI, due to their limited overall clinical utility.

AF
T

Urine chemistries, including FeNa and FeUrea, have historically been used to support
differentiation between hemodynamic-mediated (prerenal) AKI and ATI (ATN).
Traditionally, low FeNa (<1%) and FeUrea (<35%) were considered indicative of prerenal
AKI in older children and adults who had oliguria, were not on diuretics (for FeNa), and
were without a history of CKD. However, contemporary evidence indicates that these indices
have limited diagnostic performance when applied in the majority of people with AKI, 245 in
whom the physiologic assumptions underlying FeNa and FeUrea (preserved tubular sodium
and urea handling in hemodynamic-mediated AKI) are often not met, and confounding
factors, including diuretic exposure, CKD, and recent fluid or vasoactive therapy are often
present.246

D

R

A systematic review and meta-analysis from 2022 identified 19 studies comprising
1287 participants that examined the accuracy of FeNa for differentiating prerenal versus
intrinsic AKI.247 Among 15 studies using the conventional FeNa threshold of 1%, the pooled
sensitivity was 90% (95% CI: 81%–95%; I2: 85%), and pooled specificity was 82% (95% CI:
70%–90%), I2: 82%.247 Importantly, when examining the subset of 8 studies, including 264
participants who were oliguric, not exposed to diuretics, and without CKD, the 1% threshold
showed very high diagnostic accuracy, with sensitivity of 95% (95% CI: 82%–99%) and
specificity of 91% (95% CI: 83%–95%). In contrast, among 6 studies that included 511
participants who had CKD or were on diuretics, the sensitivity and specificity dropped
substantially to 83% (95% CI: 64%–93%) and 66% (95% CI: 51%–78%), respectively.247
Although FeUrea has been proposed as an alternative for people receiving diuretics,
observational studies demonstrate wide variability and overlap in FeNa and FeUrea values
among people with hemodynamic-mediated AKI and tubular injury, reducing their reliability
for etiologic classification and limiting their influence on clinical decision-making.248-251 In
most people, clinical context, trajectory of kidney function, urine sediment examination, and
biomarkers of tubular stress or damage provide more insight into AKI pathophysiology than
urine chemistries alone.

108

Practice Point 2.5.5: In adults with cirrhosis-associated AKI, FeNa can be an adjunctive tool to
distinguish hepatorenal syndrome from ATI when interpreted in the appropriate clinical
context.
Cirrhosis-associated AKI encompasses a heterogeneous group of pathophysiologic
processes, including hepatorenal syndrome, ATI, and mixed or overlapping phenotypes.
Differentiating hepatorenal syndrome from ATI has important therapeutic and prognostic
implications, particularly with respect to the use of vasoconstrictor therapy, albumin
administration, and decisions regarding RRT and liver transplant evaluation.252

AF
T

FeNa may retain discriminatory value in cirrhosis, owing to the distinct renal sodiumhandling physiology characteristic of hepatorenal syndrome. Hepatorenal syndrome is
marked by intense renal vasoconstriction with preserved tubular integrity, resulting in avid
sodium retention and typically very low FeNa values. In comparison, ATI in cirrhosis is
associated with structural tubular damage, impaired sodium reabsorption, and relatively
higher FeNa values.

R

Several observational studies have demonstrated that very low FeNa values (often
<0.1%–0.2%) are more consistent with hepatorenal syndrome, whereas higher values
increase the likelihood of tubular injury,246, 253 particularly when supported by additional
clinical and laboratory features (e.g., urinary sediment, lack of response to volume
expansion, exposure to nephrotoxins, or ischemic insults). However, important limitations
should be recognized. FeNa values may be affected by diuretic exposure, recent volume
administration, sepsis or systemic inflammation. Further, mixed hepatorenal syndrome–ATI
phenotypes are common in advanced cirrhosis.252, 254, 255 Still, in studies comparing FeNa
with FeUrea in people with liver disease, FeNa consistently outperformed FeUrea for
distinguishing hepatorenal syndrome from other forms of AKI.256, 257

D

Accordingly, FeNa should not be used in isolation to establish the diagnosis of
hepatorenal syndrome or ATI. Rather, it should be interpreted alongside clinical criteria for
hepatorenal syndrome, urine sediment findings, and the overall clinical trajectory. The Work
Group agreed with consensus statements from the International Club of Ascites (ICA) and
the ADQI emphasizing that while urinary indices such as FeNa may provide supportive data,
diagnosis of hepatorenal syndrome should not rely solely on these values due to their variable
sensitivity and limited specificity in complex clinical settings.252, 258
Practice Point 2.5.6: In adults with cirrhosis-associated AKI, urinary or plasma NGAL
may be an adjunct to help differentiate between ATI and hepatorenal syndrome,
particularly when clinical features or response to volume expansion or vasoconstrictor
therapy are equivocal.

109

Biomarkers that offer direct assessment of tubular injury may be adjuncts in
diagnostic evaluation with implications for management. NGAL has been relatively
extensively studied as a biomarker in cirrhosis-associated AKI.246, 253 In a multicenter,
prospective observational study by Belcher et al., 188 participants with cirrhosis and AKI
were adjudicated by an expert panel as having prerenal AKI (n=55), hepatorenal syndrome
(n=16), or ATI (n=39).246 Urine NGAL levels were significantly higher in ATI (565 ng/ml;
IQR: 76–1000) than in hepatorenal syndrome (115 ng/ml; IQR: 51–373) and prerenal AKI
(54 ng/ml; IQR 17–180; p <0.001), providing early evidence that NGAL could assist in
distinguishing the cause of AKI in people with cirrhosis.217, 259

AF
T

A subsequent, larger prospective multicenter study evaluated 213 hospitalized
participants with decompensated cirrhosis, 161 of whom had AKI. Of these, 57 had volumeresponsive AKI, 55 met ICA criteria for hepatorenal syndrome, and 49 had ATI. NGAL
levels normalized to urine creatinine followed a similar pattern: lowest in prerenal AKI (45
µg/g creatinine; IQR: 0–154), intermediate in HRS (110 µg/g creatinine; IQR: 50–393), and
highest in ATI (334 µg/g creatinine; IQR 132–1429; p <0.001).260 NGAL discriminated ATI
from other AKI types with a C-statistic of 0.76 (95% CI: 0.68–0.84), a positive predictive
value of 56%, and a negative predictive value of 86%. Urinary NGAL also independently
predicted overall and transplant-free survival, modestly outperforming the Model for EndStage Liver Disease (MELD) score. A systematic review and meta-analysis aggregating
multiple cohorts (21 studies, n=3701 participants) reported a pooled duration of response of
22.15 (95% CI: 17.58–27.89) for the ability of urine NGAL to detect ATI.261

D

R

These results suggest that NGAL is a useful tool for diagnosing and predicting
outcomes in cirrhosis-related AKI, especially when clinical signs, response to volume, or
changes in creatinine are unclear. However, AKI in cirrhosis is often multifactorial, and
individual patients may exhibit overlapping features of volume depletion, hepatorenal
syndrome, and ATI. Further, NGAL assays are unavailable in many centers, thresholds for
NGAL interpretation vary by assay, and NGAL has not been incorporated into formal
diagnostic criteria for hepatorenal syndrome. Thus, when used, NGAL should be integrated
with clinical findings, urine sediment examination, therapeutic response, and longitudinal
assessment of kidney function to support clinical decision-making in selected patients.209, 262
Practice Point 2.5.7: Kidney biopsy should be considered for children and adults with
unexplained AKI when clinical evaluation does not clearly differentiate among potential
causes or the findings are expected to influence management decisions.
Kidney biopsy may be considered in people with unexplained AKI when clinical
evaluation does not clearly differentiate among potential etiologies or when histopathological
diagnosis is expected to influence clinical decision-making. While many cases of AKI can be
managed based on clinical and laboratory data alone, a subset of people present with
diagnostic uncertainty, atypical presentations, or nonresolving injury, where biopsy may
110

provide crucial insights that guide management. Biopsy findings can clarify ambiguous
presentations, identify treatable diseases, prevent therapeutic misdirection, and enable
personalized care.

AF
T

Studies have consistently shown that histologic diagnoses obtained from kidney
biopsies for AKI can diverge from clinical impressions. In a large study conducted in the
1990s in the U.S. of 259 older adults who received a native kidney biopsy for AKI, biopsy
yielded a definitive diagnosis in over 90% of cases, kidney biopsy diagnosis differed from
the prebiopsy clinical diagnosis in 33% of cases, and a diagnosis offering the potential for
improved outcomes with treatment was deemed to have been made in 73% of the cases.263
Kidney biopsy findings also provide prognostic information. In a Korean multicenter cohort,
biopsy-confirmed ATN and AIN had distinct outcomes, with AIN conferring a higher risk of
progression to kidney failure.264
Regional biopsy series further highlight the diagnostic value of histopathologic
assessment. In a case series of patients biopsied for AKI from a tertiary care center in South
India, AIN was the most commonly diagnosed lesion.265 A systematic review by Wen et al.
confirmed significant diversity in the histopathologic manifestations of ATI and noted
limited correlation with clinical phenotypes.266 In the setting of COVID-19, biopsies have
revealed a wide spectrum of kidney pathologies, including collapsing glomerulopathy, ATN,
and minimal change disease, which were not clinically apparent.267, 268 This diagnostic
variability highlights the limitations of relying solely on noninvasive assessments in complex
or diagnostically uncertain clinical scenarios.

D

R

The Kidney Precision Medicine Project (KPMP) reinforces the diagnostic value of
biopsy, to integrate kidney tissue analysis with molecular and clinical data, demonstrating
significant pathologic and transcriptomic heterogeneity in AKI, even among clinically
similar patients.269 These findings support broader use of kidney biopsy, helping to uncover
disease sub-endotypes and potential therapeutic targets.270 Biopsy is particularly critical
when etiologic certainty is important for subsequent management decisions, such as with
immune checkpoint inhibitor associated AKI. A case series by Rashidi et al. illustrated
presentations where people with presumed AIN based on clinical grounds had ATI on
biopsy, which allowed continuation of oncologic immunotherapy and avoided inappropriate
change of immunosuppression.271
Concerns around procedural risks of kidney biopsy must be balanced against
diagnostic and therapeutic yield. A meta-analysis of over 118,000 native kidney biopsies
reported low rates of significant complications, such as major bleeding (0.3%) and death
(0.06%).272 A multicenter, ICU-based study that included biopsies of 68 native kidneys (87%
using ultrasound guidance), showed that a specific diagnosis other than ATN was established
in 35 (51%) critically ill participants, and altered management decisions in 14 (21%)
participants.273 Biopsy complications occurred in 22% of participants of whom only 2 were
111

graded as severe (requirement for kidney embolization). Although major complications after
native kidney biopsy are uncommon in the general inpatient and outpatient populations,
complication rates are higher in people who are critically ill and those undergoing biopsy in
the ICU, where hemodynamic instability, coagulopathy, and greater illness severity are more
frequent.
Practice Point 2.5.8: Kidney Doppler ultrasound, including measurement of renal
resistive index (RRI), may aid in risk stratification for AKI progression and severity,
particularly in critically ill populations.

AF
T

Kidney ultrasound using Doppler technique, specifically with measurement of renal
resistive index (RRI) and renal pulsatility index (RPI) has emerged as a noninvasive
diagnostic adjunct for predicting the development of AKI, especially in the ICU setting. 274, 275
The RRI reflects downstream resistance in the renal arterial vasculature and is calculated
from systolic and diastolic velocities in renal arteries. In the context of AKI, higher RRI
values have been associated with renal hypoperfusion and vascular resistance that precedes
SCr elevation. RRI is influenced by systemic hemodynamics and extrarenal factors (e.g.,
arterial compliance, heart rate, venous congestion, and intra-abdominal pressure) and should
not be interpreted as a measure of intrinsic renal vascular resistance alone. Thus, Doppler
ultrasound measurements of RRI (and optionally RPI) may be used as adjuncts for early
prediction of AKI, alongside standard clinical and laboratory parameters.

R

Evidence review of data of 5 studies in a total of 572 critically ill adult participants
showed that power doppler ultrasound had low sensitivity, but high specificity, with high
overall accuracy to predict incident AKI.276 Evaluation of RRI had moderate sensitivity,
specificity and accuracy to predict AKI incidence with an AUC 0.83 (95 % CI: 0.80–0.86).

D

Data in pediatric populations are more limited. Based on data from 3 studies in a total
of 188 children, RRI had variable test accuracy (AUC: 0.86; 95% CI: 0.46–0.98) and RPI
also had variable test accuracy (AUC: 0.84; 95% CI: 0.36–0.98) to predict the risk of AKI
across studies.277-279
Doppler ultrasound findings are operator-dependent, which is an important limitation.
Standardization of threshold values and protocol integration is needed to support
implementation in clinical settings.
Practice Point 2.5.9: In hospitalized or critically ill patients with AKI, point-of-care
ultrasound (POCUS) may assist in assessing volume status and distinguishing volume
responsive AKI from intrinsic AKI.
Ultrasound is a readily available, noninvasive test that can help identify potentially
reversible causes of AKI. In selected people presenting with AKI who have risk factors,
112

signs, or symptoms of urinary tract obstruction (e.g., anuria/oliguria, lower urinary tract
symptoms, known or suspected stones, pelvic malignancy, benign prostatic hyperplasia,
neurogenic bladder, prior urologic surgery, or an indwelling catheter with poor output),
kidney and bladder ultrasound (KUB) should be considered to evaluate for hydronephrosis
and bladder outlet obstruction, as these findings may prompt immediate, kidney-sparing
interventions. In addition to excluding obstruction, bedside ultrasound can be integrated with
point-of-care assessments to support hemodynamic evaluation in hospitalized and critically
ill patients with AKI.

AF
T

Clinical differentiation between volume-responsive and intrinsic AKI (with structural
kidney damage) can be a diagnostic challenge, particularly in people with conditions that
make clinical volume assessment difficult. POCUS has emerged as a valuable adjunct to
physical examination, offering real-time, noninvasive insights into intravascular volume,
venous congestion, and structural abnormalities.
Multiorgan POCUS assessing cardiac, lung, abdominal, and venous structures can aid
AKI management by identification of volume overload, venous congestion, and cardiac
dysfunction. The inferior vena cava collapsibility index (IVC-CI) is a particularly useful
POCUS-derived parameter for assessing fluid responsiveness and identifying people at risk
for hypotension. A more detailed framework for AKI classification using POCUS has been
proposed by Varanasi et al., where hemodynamic AKI is assessed using IVC collapsibility,
lung B-lines, and echocardiographic surrogates.280 Obstructive causes such as hydronephrosis
and bladder outlet obstruction can also be readily identified at the bedside.

R

POCUS has been increasingly incorporated into management of AKI. In people who
are critically ill with cirrhosis and hepatorenal syndrome, POCUS has been described to
assess fluid status, cardiac function, and venous congestion, thereby influencing decisions
around albumin therapy and vasopressor use.281 Operator dependency is the major limitation.

D

Multiorgan POCUS is most informative when performed using a standardized
protocol to assess volume status, venous congestion, and fluid responsiveness, and when
supported by structured training, competency assessment, and ongoing quality assurance.
2.6. Considerations specific to children
Practice Point 2.6.1: Children at increased risk for community-acquired AKI should
undergo a kidney health assessment during episodes of acute illness.
There are well-defined pediatric populations with a disproportionately high risk for
AKI, such as solid organ transplant, malignancy, congenital heart disease, or CKD,,
particularly during intercurrent illnesses.282-284 Given the limited pediatric nephrology,
workforce, expert groups have emphasized the importance of a structured kidney health
assessment that can be implemented by pediatricians and other pediatric subspecialists to
113

support risk stratification and identify children who may benefit from referral to a pediatric
nephrologist.285-288 Incorporating components of a kidney health assessment into the
evaluation of high-risk children may facilitate early recognition of community-acquired AKI
and timely interventions to mitigate progression and downstream morbidity (Table 19).

AF
T

Table 19 | Components of kidney health assessment for risk stratification in high-risk children
during acute illness
Component
Purpose
Serum creatinine
To assess kidney function and detect changes from baseline.
Urine output
To identify oliguria or anuria.
Urinalysis
To detect hematuria, proteinuria, or loss of concentrating ability
Electrolytes
To assess for hyperkalemia, hyponatremia, or metabolic acidosis
Fluid status assessment To evaluate for signs of hypovolemia or fluid overload (e.g., edema,
hypertension, respiratory distress), including weight changes, evaluation
of fluid intake/output and assessment of capillary refill.
Medication review
To identify recent or ongoing exposures to potentially nephrotoxic agents
and medications that may require dose adjustment in the setting of AKI.
AKI, acute kidney injury

Recommendation 2.6.1: For critically ill children at risk for AKI, we suggest using the
renal angina index (RAI) to identify children at high risk of severe AKI and RRT (2B).

D

R

This recommendation places a high value on early identification of children at increased risk
of AKI and need for RRT who could benefit from closer monitoring of kidney function and
damage markers, use of kidney-protective strategies, and particular attention to fluid
balance management. This recommendation is based largely on test accuracy of the risk
score for clinical outcomes (prediction of AKI, severe AKI, RRT, and mortality) without
direct evidence of clinical effectiveness from “test and treat” study designs. Although test
accuracy studies do not measure the impact of the RAI on patient management and
outcomes, this Level 2 recommendation is based on the ability to apply kidney-protective
strategies that are generally low-risk and low-cost, and to aid with planning for RRT for
high-risk children.
Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
The RAI is a validated, bedside risk stratification tool that integrates readily available
clinical risk factors (e.g., critical illness, mechanical ventilation, exposure to nephrotoxins
with stem cell transplant) with early signs of kidney stress (e.g., changes in SCr or fluid
overload; Table 20).

114

Table 20 | Renal angina index scoring289
ICU admission alone
1 point
Solid organ or stem cell transplant
3 points
Ventilation or Inotropy
5 points
Kidney Injury or Volume overload
1 point
•
No decrease in eCrCl or < 5% FO
2 points
•
eCrCl decrease 0-25% or >5% FO
4 points
•
eCrCl decrease 25-50% or >10% FO
8 points
•
eCrCl decrease >50% or >15% FO
eCrCl, estimated creatinine clearance; FO, fluid overload. Reproduced from Basu et al. 2014 289

AF
T

Evidence review of 18 studies in a total of 13,098 children showed that high RAI (≥8)
has moderate accuracy to predict incident AKI (sensitivity 76%, specificity 78%) and Stage 2
to 3 AKI (sensitivity 85%, specificity 74%) within 48–72 hours, with moderate sensitivity
(84%) but low specificity (61%) to predict need for RRT (Supplementary Table S38).290-305
Use of the RAI may support timely implementation of kidney-protective strategies,
closer monitoring, and improved preparedness for potential RRT, which may reduce
complications associated with delayed recognition of kidney failure. The high sensitivity of
the RAI can be particularly helpful to identify children at low risk for severe AKI or RRT,
potentially reducing unnecessary laboratory testing, invasive monitoring, or escalation of
care. The index requires no invasive testing, is low cost, and feasible to implement in most
inpatient settings, including intensive care units.

D

R

The potential harms of RAI use are limited. False-positive classification may lead to
increased monitoring, additional blood tests, or additional intervention without clear evidence
that these actions improve patient-centered outcomes. Such downstream effects may increase
resource utilization. There is also a risk that reliance on the RAI could oversimplify complex
clinical decision-making if used in isolation rather than in conjunction with clinical
judgment. Overall, given the low likelihood of direct harm, the absence of invasive
procedures, and the potential for clinical benefit through earlier identification of severe AKI
and preparedness for RRT, the balance of benefits and harms favors use of the RAI and
supports a Level 2 statement.
Certainty of evidence
There is high certainty of evidence that the RAI in children has moderate to high
sensitivity (moderate defined as 76% to 89%, high defined as ≥90%) to predict AKI
outcomes, including incident AKI and Stage 3 AKI, but with moderate certainty evidence,
and poor specificity (defined as 51% to 75%) to predict RRT or death.291-294, 296-303 The
certainty of evidence for the latter outcomes was downgraded for methodological limitations
of studies reporting Stage 2–3 AKI and for imprecision of estimates of specificity to predict
RRT and mortality. No trials have evaluated the clinical impact of implementing the RAI in
children; thus the overall certainty of evidence was downgraded, for indirectness, to
moderate.
115

Values and preferences
This recommendation places a high value on early identification of risk of severe AKI
and need for RRT in critically ill children. Patients, families, and healthcare professionals
generally prioritize strategies that reduce the risk of organ failure, invasive therapies,
prolonged hospitalization, and long-term kidney disease, even when supported by lowcertainty evidence, provided that the intervention is low risk. The moderate-to-high
sensitivity of the RAI aligns with preferences to avoid unnecessary investigations or
interventions in children at low risk, while focusing attention and resources on those most
likely to benefit from closer monitoring or kidney-protective strategies.

AF
T

Families may value the use of a transparent risk assessment tool that facilitates
anticipatory guidance, earlier communication about potential kidney-related complications,
and proactive care planning, including preparedness for possible RRT. At the same time,
some families and healthcare professionals may place greater weight on avoiding overmonitoring or anxiety related to false-positive risk classification, particularly in the absence
of definitive evidence that RAI-guided interventions improve outcomes. Thus, there is likely
variability in how patients, families, and healthcare professionals weigh the benefits of early
risk identification against the potential for increased monitoring and resource use. However,
given the noninvasive nature of the RAI and the serious outcomes it seeks to prevent, most
stakeholders would favor its use in children at risk for AKI, supporting a Level 2 statement.

D

R

Resource use and costs
Use of the RAI incurs minimal direct resource use as it is calculated using clinical
variables that are routinely collected in standard inpatient care. Calculating and interpreting
the RAI requires modest healthcare professional time, which may be integrated into routine
assessments by physicians, nurses, or clinical support staff. Some initial investment in
training healthcare professionals and staff on how to calculate, interpret, and act on the RAI
may be necessary.
Use of the RAI may lead to increased monitoring, additional nursing assessments, or
increased consultation for children identified as high risk. These downstream activities may
incur additional costs, though they may also prevent costly complications through
appropriate early intervention. Overall, the resource use and costs associated with the RAI
are relatively low compared with the potential clinical benefits of identifying children at high
risk for severe AKI and RRT.
Considerations for implementation
The RAI is most effectively applied early during hospitalization, particularly within
the first 12–24 hours of admission or onset of critical illness. Clear identification of target
populations (i.e., critically ill children) is important to avoid unnecessary application in
people at low risk.
116

Integration of the RAI into routine clinical workflows can enhance feasibility and
consistency. Where available, embedding automated RAI calculation and alerts within the
EHR may reduce healthcare professional burden and improve uptake. In settings without
electronic automation, standardized paper or electronic checklists can be used with minimal
additional resources. Education and training of physicians, nurses, and allied health
professionals are essential to ensure correct calculation, interpretation, and appropriate
clinical response to RAI results.

AF
T

Institutions should define how RAI results will inform care pathways. For children
identified as high risk, predefined kidney-protective strategies may include enhanced
monitoring of urine output, kidney function and damage biomarkers, review and
minimization of nephrotoxic medications, and optimization of fluid and hemodynamic
management. The RAI should be used to support, not replace, clinical judgment, and
healthcare professionals should remain attentive to evolving clinical changes that may
warrant action despite a low RAI score.

D

R

Rationale
Given the value of early AKI risk stratification, the consistency of observational
evidence supporting the predictive performance of the RAI, and the low risk of harm
associated with its use, the Work Group suggests the use of the RAI in critically ill children
at risk for AKI to assess the likelihood of severe AKI. The overall certainty of evidence is
low, reflecting the predominance of observational studies and absence of outcome-driven
interventional trials, supporting a Level 2 recommendation.

117

CHAPTER 3. PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF AKI

AF
T

Numerous prevention and treatment strategies have been investigated for AKI. Given
the central role of the kidneys in regulating fluid balance and BP, derangements in these
parameters are closely associated with the development of AKI. Much of the evidence
generated to prevent and mitigate AKI in acutely ill patients has focused on hemodynamic
management strategies, including intravenous fluids and vasoactive/inotropic support, guided
by clinical assessment (mental state, heart rate, respiratory rate, peripheral perfusion,
capillary return, skin turgor, oedema), physiological and biochemical information (urine
output, SCr, lactate concentration, biomarkers, and pH), and hemodynamic parameters
(cardiac output, BP, central venous pressure, pulse pressure variation, stroke volume
variation).
AKI is not a uniform entity. While many aspects of care are applicable to prevention
and management of all causes of AKI, some strategies are specific to particular etiologies.
Distinct forms of AKI include AKI that occurs in the perioperative setting, hepatorenal
syndrome, tumor lysis syndrome, rhabdomyolysis, and pregnancy-associated AKI.

R

Current evidence for AKI prevention and management has primarily been shaped by
research on hospital-acquired AKI in high-resource settings. This knowledge often does not
fully address the unique risk factors, diagnostic challenges, socioeconomic aspects, and
resource limitations in low- and middle-resource settings. Addressing community-acquired
AKI requires public health-oriented strategies including community education, improved
access to clean water, early recognition and referral systems, and scalable, low-cost treatment
options alongside individualized clinical management.

D

3.1 Fluid management
Recommendation 3.1.1: We recommend using crystalloids rather than colloids
(albumin, gelatin, or starches) as initial management for intravascular volume
expansion in children and adults at risk of or with AKI or AKD (1B).
This recommendation puts high value on evidence from large RCTs consistently
demonstrating superiority of crystalloids over artificial colloids and equivalence with natural
colloids (e.g., albumin) for preventing AKI, need for RRT, and mortality. It also places value
on the lower cost of crystalloids compared with colloids. It places a lower value on the
potentially greater, but short-lived hemodynamic effects of colloids. It does not apply to
people with hemorrhagic shock, in whom blood products are appropriate for resuscitation.

118

AF
T

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
This recommendation aligns with the KDIGO 2012 AKI guideline, which provided
an extensive review of this subject. A network meta-analysis of 49 RCTs (including 40,910
critically ill adults) included comparisons of crystalloids versus high- and low-molecular
weight hydroxyethyl starch (HES).306 The study found a significantly lower risk of any stage
AKI (OR: 0.55; 95% CI: 0.34–0.88) and RRT (OR: 0.51; 95% CI 0.27–0.93) with crystalloid
fluids versus high molecular weight HES (Supplementary Table S39), but no significant
difference versus low molecular weight HES (OR for AKI: 0.91; 95% CI: 0.73–1.21; OR for
RRT: 0.74; 95% CI 0.52–1.15; Supplementary Table S40). However, the likelihood of
mortality was lower among people treated with crystalloids than either high molecular weight
HES (OR: 0.76; 95% CI: 0.58–0.99) or low molecular weight HES (OR: 0.88; 95% CI: 0.78–
0.99). A systematic review and meta-analysis of 3 RCTs comparing gelatin-containing
plasma expanders versus crystalloids or albumin in a total of 212 patients showed no
significant difference in AKI.307

R

Key studies in the field published subsequent to the KDIGO 2012 AKI guideline
include the Crystalloid versus Hydroxyethyl Starch Trial (CHEST),308 and the Scandinavian
Starch for Severe Sepsis/Septic Shock (6S) trial; these trials focus on lower molecular weight
HES.309 The CHEST trial demonstrated no difference in mortality but an increase in RRT in
those treated with 6% HES (7.0% vs. 5.8%, p=0.04).308 The 6S trial in adults with sepsis
demonstrated that resuscitation with 6% HES increased mortality (RR: 1.17; 95% CI: 1.01–
1.36; p=0.03) as well as development of AKI requiring RRT (RR: 1.35; 95% CI: 1.01–1.80,
p=0.04) with a trend towards an increase in major bleeding events compared to resuscitation
with Ringer’s acetate.309

D

In a network meta-analysis of 58 RCTs (including 26,351 participants), various
fluids, including albumin, were compared in adults with sepsis, surgical, trauma and
traumatic brain injury. No significant differences in risks of death, AKI, or composite
adverse events were observed between crystalloids and either iso-oncotic or hyperoncotic
albumin in separate analyses of adults with sepsis, surgery, or trauma (Supplementary Table
S41).310, 311 However, few RCTs directly compared crystalloids with albumin and effect
estimates were generally imprecise. For example, among adults undergoing surgery receiving
either crystalloids or iso-oncotic albumin, there were imprecise estimates for likelihood of
mortality (OR: 0.99; 95% CI: 0.48–2.03; 5 RCTs with direct comparisons, including 180
participants312-316) or AKI (OR 1.19; 95% CI: 0.27–5.15; no direct comparisons).310 A
systematic review that included more recent RCTs of adults undergoing major surgery had
similar imprecise estimates (OR for mortality: 0.84; 95% CI: 0.19–3.70: OR for AKI: 1.01;
95% CI: 0.41–2.42).311

119

These results are consistent with those of a Cochrane systematic review of 69 RCTs
published between 2013 and 2018 (involving 30,020 participants) comparing colloids with
crystalloids for resuscitation.317 Across 20 trials (13,047 participants), albumin or fresh
frozen plasma showed no difference in mortality compared to crystalloids (RR: 0.98; 95%
CI: 0.92–1.06), and there was no difference in the need for RRT (RR: 1.11; 95% CI: 0.96–
1.27). However, use of HES was associated with a 30% increased risk for RRT (RR: 1.30;
95% CI: 1.14–1.48; 9 studies, 8527 participants).

AF
T

There are fewer studies investigating the effects of fluid types in children. A metaanalysis of 3 RCTs (including 924 children) showed no evidence that the choice of gelatin
versus albumin or crystalloids affected the risk of death (RR: 1.21; 95% CI: 0.94–1.57) or
any stage of AKI (RR: 0.36; 95% CI: 0.04–3.23; Supplementary Table S42).307 These
findings are consistent with the results of a systematic review and meta-analysis of 12
clinical trials including 3526 children less than 18 years of age admitted to the pediatric
emergency and ICU with severe infection and shock requiring fluid resuscitation.318 The
study found no significant difference in the mortality rate in children with either sepsis or
malaria between those who received crystalloids versus colloids (RR: 0.94; 95% CI: 0.76–
1.17; 5 RCTs). Only one small RCT of 60 participants evaluated the risk of AKI, comparing
colloids versus crystalloids, and found a highly imprecise, nonsignificant difference (RR:
0.36; 95% CI: 0.04–3.23).319

R

Certainty of evidence
There is moderate certainty evidence that in critically ill adults, high molecular
weight HES increases the risk of death and risk of AKI requiring RRT with low certainty of
evidence of an increase in incident AKI compared with crystalloids (buffered or saline
0.9%).306, 320 The certainty of evidence was downgraded for methodological limitations and
further downgraded for AKI due to sparseness of data.

D

Similarly, there is moderate certainty evidence low molecular weight HES increases
the risk of death in critically ill patients; however, there is low certainty of evidence of no
increased risk of AKI or AKI requiring RRT compared with crystalloids (buffered or saline
0.9%).306, 309 The certainty of evidence was downgraded for methodological limitations and
further downgraded for AKI and RRT due to imprecision.
In various populations of adults at increased risk for AKI, including those undergoing
surgery, having sepsis, or having experienced trauma, there is very low certainty of evidence
of no difference in death or incident AKI between balanced crystalloids and either isooncotic or hyperoncotic albumin (based primarily on a network meta-analysis), with no
evidence regarding harms.310, 311 The certainty of evidence was downgraded because of

120

imprecise estimates, sparse data, and indirectness due to lack of studies that directly
compared balanced crystalloids and albumin.
In critically ill children with hypervolemia, there is moderate certainty of evidence of
no difference in risk of death between gelatin and albumin or crystalloids. The certainty of
evidence was downgraded due to imprecision; however, there was very low certainty
regarding the relative effect on risk of AKI due to a highly imprecise estimate from a single
study.307 With higher certainty of evidence for death than AKI, we assessed the overall
certainty of evidence to be moderate.

AF
T

Values and preferences
This recommendation places a high value on minimizing the risk of AKI or AKD,
and on the use of interventions with the most favorable balance of benefits to risks. The
Work Group judged that, for most people, the potential kidney and systemic harms
associated with the use of colloids, especially synthetic starches, outweigh any uncertain or
modest benefits related to intravascular volume expansion.

R

The recommendation also reflects a preference for crystalloids because they are
widely available, familiar to healthcare professionals, less costly, and supported by evidence
suggesting comparable or superior safety with respect to kidney outcomes. The Work Group
recognized that some patients or healthcare professionals may value potential short-term
hemodynamic effects of colloids or have specific clinical circumstances where albumin is
considered. However, given the low certainty of evidence for benefit and the consistent
signal for harm with certain colloids, most well-informed patients would likely prefer
crystalloids as initial therapy to reduce kidney-related risks. Specific people (e.g., Jehovah’s
witnesses) may object to receiving albumin because it is derived from human blood.

D

Resource use and costs
The Work Group considered resource utilization and costs to be important factors in
formulating this recommendation. Crystalloids are inexpensive, widely available across a
broad range of healthcare settings, and do not require specialized storage or administration,
making them feasible for use in both high- and low-resource settings. Albumin is
significantly more expensive than crystalloids and requires human plasma for production.
Artificial colloids, including gelatins and starches, are more expensive than crystalloids and
are not available everywhere.
Use of some colloids is also associated with increased downstream resource
utilization due to higher rates of RRT, which may further increase overall healthcare costs.
Avoiding these colloids as initial therapy may therefore reduce both direct acquisition costs
and indirect costs related to complications and prolonged hospitalization. Overall, routine use
121

of more expensive colloid solutions does not represent a cost-effective use of healthcare
resources.

AF
T

Considerations for implementation
Implementation of this recommendation requires ensuring that crystalloids are readily
available and prioritized as the default fluids for initial intravascular volume expansion.
Institutional protocols, order sets, and clinical pathways should reflect crystalloids as firstline therapy, with clear guidance on fluid selection and correct use. Education of clinicians,
nurses, and pharmacists is important to reinforce the rationale for avoiding colloids in this
population and to promote consistent practice across care settings. The Work Group
acknowledges that albumin may still be considered in specific clinical circumstances or
disease states based on healthcare professional judgment or other guideline
recommendations;252, 321, 322 such use should be clearly justified and documented. Protocols
and pathways should indicate that synthetic starches should be avoided.

D

R

Rationale
Shock and intravascular volume depletion (including bleeding) can trigger AKI.
Consequently, intravascular volume expansion is needed in these settings. The choice of fluid
depends on the type of fluid lost. Blood products are the fluid of choice for resuscitation of
hemorrhagic shock. In the absence of hemorrhagic shock, the Work Group judged that
crystalloids offer a more favorable risk–benefit balance for initial fluid management in
people at risk of or with AKI or AKD compared to colloids. Although the certainty of
evidence is low (Grade C), the consistency of findings demonstrating lack of benefit and
potential harm, coupled with considerations of safety, availability, and cost, supports a Level
1 recommendation in favor of crystalloids as first-line therapy. This recommendation is
consistent with the Surviving Sepsis Campaign International Guidelines recommendation for
using crystalloids rather than albumin for initial fluid resuscitation in children and adults with
septic shock or sepsis-associated organ dysfunction.323
Recommendation 3.1.2: We recommend using buffered crystalloids instead of 0.9%
saline for volume expansion in the absence of traumatic brain injury in children and
adults at risk of or with AKI or AKD (1B).
This recommendation puts a high value on the reduced AKI incidence, severity, and
treatment with RRT with buffered crystalloids compared to 0.9% saline. It places a lower
value on their accessibility and potentially higher costs. This recommendation does not apply
to people with traumatic brain injury, in whom 0.9% saline may be preferred due to concerns
about the impact on intracranial pressure with solutions of lower serum osmolality, or choice
of fluids for prevention of tumor lysis, heme-pigment or contrast-associated AKI. Buffered
crystalloids may reduce the risk of hyperchloremia and metabolic acidosis compared with
122

0.9% saline, which is relevant in people at risk of or with AKI or AKD. The choice of
buffered crystalloid may be influenced by availability and costs.

AF
T

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Chloride-rich solutions like 0.9% saline may cause renal vasoconstriction and
ischemia resulting in AKI.324, 325 A meta-analysis of 21 RCTs (including 36387 adults)
showed lower mortality with the use of buffered crystalloids compared with 0.9% saline,
with a RR of 0.96 (95% CI: 0.92–1.00; Supplementary Table S43). In 12 trials including
29,241 adults, the incidence of AKI was lower with buffered crystalloids versus 0.9% saline
(RR: 0.93; 95% CI: 0.87–0.99) as was RRT use (RR: 0.92; 95% CI: 0.84–1.01), although the
latter was not statistically significant.326-330

R

The study that reinvigorated interest in buffered solution was an open-label, single
center sequential period study of chloride-restricted solutions (Hartmann’s solution,
Plasmalyte-148, and low chloride albumin) versus chloride-rich fluids that demonstrated a
reduction in Stage 2 or 3 AKI, including reduced need for RRT, with the use of chloriderestricted solutions.331 The subsequent 0.9% Saline vs Plasma-Lyte 148 (PL-148) for ICU
fluid Therapy (SPLIT) trial did not demonstrate significant effects of buffered solutions on
AKI incidence , RRT, or mortality.332 However, the indications for fluid therapy were not
specified, 71% of subjects were enrolled postoperatively and had already received fluids in a
nonrandomized manner during surgery, and the overall exposure to study fluids was
relatively low (a median of 2 liters) during ICU stay.

D

Two large, pragmatic, multiple crossover, single-center cluster clinical trials
subsequently demonstrated benefit of buffered fluids on MAKE at 30 days (MAKE30) among
critically ill adults in the ICU as well as adults admitted to non-ICU settings from the
emergency department.333, 334 In the Isotonic Solutions and Major Adverse Renal Events Trial
(SMART),334 the rate of MAKE30 was 14.3% in the buffered crystalloids arm compared to
15.4% in the 0.9% saline arm among critically ill adults (OR: 0.90; 95% CI: 0.82–0.99;
p=0.04). In the Saline against Lactated Ringer’s or Plasma-Lyte in the Emergency
Department (SALT-ED) trial,333 the overall MAKE30 incidence was lower than observed in
the critically ill population, but a statistically significant difference in this outcome favoring
buffered crystalloids was still observed (OR: 0.82; 95% CI: 0.70–0.95; P=0.01).
Individual subsequent patient-level RCTs have been unable to confirm these findings.
Neither the Plasma-Lyte 148 versus Saline (PLUS) trial335 nor the Balanced Solutions in
Intensive Care Study (BASICS)336 demonstrated reductions in 90-day mortality or
improvement in kidney outcomes with buffered crystalloids. Nonetheless, multiple meta-

123

analyses based on the totality of evidence that have since been published have demonstrated
a modest effect of buffered crystalloids on AKI and mortality.337
Beyond the effects of clinical outcomes of AKI, RRT, and mortality, the
hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis that develops with the use of 0.9% saline has been
associated with increased resource utilization. In a retrospective propensity matched analysis
of participants undergoing major abdominal surgery in the U.S., not only was the use of
Plasmalyte-148 associated with lower rates of mortality and AKI compared to participants
who received 0.9% saline, but also with fewer arterial blood gas and lactate measurements.338

AF
T

Of note, buffered solutions are slightly hypotonic compared to 0.9% saline. Three
trials reported outcomes of buffered crystalloids versus 0.9% saline among 1896 adults with
traumatic brain injury at baseline. In this population, randomization to buffered crystalloids
increased mortality (RR: 1.26; 95% CI: 0.98–1.60).337 This finding suggests that the benefits
and harms of buffered crystalloids differ in those with traumatic brain injury who are at risk
for cerebral edema with solutions of lower osmolarity. In light of this finding, the
recommendation excludes people with traumatic brain injury, in whom individualized fluid
management based on consideration of potential benefits and harms was deemed more
appropriate.

R

A meta-analyses of 4 RCTs of critically ill children with and without severe sepsis or
septic shock (896 participants) showed that administration of buffered fluids versus 0.9%
saline was associated with a reduced need for RRT (OR: 0.53; 95% CI: 0.34–0.84) but no
difference in mortality (OR: 0.92; 95% CU: 0.69–1.23), incident AKI (OR: 0.89; 95% CI:
0.57–1.41), or MAKE30 (OR: 0.47; 95% CI: 0.08–2.81; Supplementary Table S44).339-342

D

A different systematic review included 12 RCTs involving 3526 children with severe
infection and septic shock of whom 96% of participants were from low- and middle-resource
settings.318 The use of buffered crystalloids compared to 0.9% saline was associated with a
reduced risk of AKI (RR: 0.67; 95% CI: 0.53–0.85) and hyperchloremia (RR: 0.69; 95% CI:
0.58–0.82), with no difference in mortality (RR: 0.99; 95% CI: 0.81–1.22) but with shorter
duration of hospital stay (mean difference [MD]: −0.66 days).339-341, 343-352
Certainty of evidence
There is moderate certainty of evidence that in critically ill adults without traumatic
brain injury, compared with 0.9% saline, buffered crystalloids reduce the risk of death,
development of AKI, and treatment with RRT, with no evidence of harms.326-330, 334, 336, 347,
348, 353-355
The certainty of evidence was downgraded due to some methodological limitations
across studies. Effect estimates for mortality and AKI in adults were precise, but there was
imprecision in adults for the estimate of the effect on RRT.
124

There is moderate certainty of evidence that in critically ill children, buffered fluids
reduce the risk of RRT, but there is no evidence of reduction in other AKI-related outcomes
or death, compared with 0.9% saline, with low or very low certainty of evidence.339-341, 343-352
There was no evidence regarding harms. The certainty of evidence was downgraded due to
methodological limitations across studies and due to imprecision for estimates of effect on
mortality and AKI in children. Given the higher certainty of evidence regarding RRT than
AKI, the overall certainty of evidence was graded as moderate.

AF
T

Values and preferences
From the point of view of patients, the use of one crystalloid type versus another feels
identical. Most well-informed patients would prefer an option where the totality of evidence
suggests it may have a small effect on lowering mortality, reduces the incidence of AKI, and
avoids metabolic complications such as hyperchloremia and metabolic acidosis, which may
precipitate the need for RRT.

R

The Work Group recognized that healthcare professionals and patients may value the
simplicity, availability, and perceived safety of 0.9% saline, and that individual clinical
circumstances; such as traumatic brain injury, specific electrolyte abnormalities, or local
resource constraints; may influence fluid choice. Therefore, it is logical to support the
administration of buffered solutions, except for situations where their administration could be
harmful (e.g., in people at risk of or with traumatic brain injury or cerebral edema) or they
remain relatively unstudied (e.g., tumor lysis syndrome prophylaxis), or when the
administration of such fluids might delay care (e.g. during shock or crush injury, when a
delay in care may be detrimental).

D

Resource use and costs
Some buffered crystalloids such as lactate Ringer’s solution or Hartmann’s solution
are widely available and have costs that are similar to 0.9% saline in many jurisdictions,
though costs up to 1.1–2 times higher than 0.9% saline have been described in low- and
middle-resource settings.356 However, Plasma-Lyte is less widely accessible, and its price
varies between countries and can be substantially higher than 0.9% saline. While the
magnitude of benefit of buffered solutions in terms of RRT, MAKE, or mortality is low, over
30 million patients receive intravenous fluids every year, making fluid therapy a fundamental
component of acute care.357 From a population health perspective, the benefit of even small
effects on clinical outcomes such as RRT and mortality is significant and supportive of cost
utility. Further, use of buffered crystalloids may reduce the incidence of hyperchloremic
metabolic acidosis and related complications, which can prompt additional laboratory testing,
therapeutic interventions, and prolonged hospitalization, further supporting costeffectiveness.
125

The Work Group acknowledged that the cost and availability of buffered crystalloids
vary across regions, and 0.9% saline may be the only readily accessible isotonic fluid in
some low-resource settings. In such contexts, the recommendation should not impede timely
volume resuscitation. Overall, given the modest incremental cost and the potential to improve
outcomes and reduce downstream resource utilization, the Work Group judged buffered
crystalloids to represent a reasonable and potentially cost-effective option for volume
expansion.

AF
T

Considerations for implementation
Implementation of this recommendation requires that buffered crystalloids be readily
available and incorporated as the default option for volume expansion in most acutely ill
patients. Saline (0.9% saline) remains the most widely available intravenous fluid globally,
including in low resource settings, due to established supply chains and lower production
costs. Buffered solutions are less consistently available. Lactate Ringer’s is more commonly
stocked than other buffered solutions, though its availability can still be limited by
procurement policies, local manufacturing capacity, and supply chain constraints. PlasmaLyte and similar solutions are less available, often restricted to tertiary care centers or urban
hospitals. Implementation of this recommendation is expected to require changes to
manufacturer incentives and institutional procurement of intravenous fluid solutions to
supply buffered solutions at scale.358 Policy interventions and procurement strategies may be
needed to ensure equitable access.

D

R

Institutional policies, order sets, and clinical pathways should be updated to reflect
buffered crystalloids as first-line fluids, with clear indications for when 0.9% saline remains
appropriate, including traumatic brain injury or specific clinical scenarios, for instance as
carrier substance for certain medications. Education of healthcare professionals is important
to promote understanding of the physiologic differences between buffered crystalloids and
0.9% saline and the rationale for preferential use in this population.
Rationale
Fluid therapy is a key component of the prevention and management of AKI and
AKD, and the composition of administered fluids may influence kidney outcomes and
mortality. Saline (0.9% saline) contains a supraphysiologic chloride concentration, which can
lead to hyperchloremia, metabolic acidosis, and renal vasoconstriction, potentially reducing
kidney perfusion and contributing to AKI.
Buffered crystalloids more closely approximate the electrolyte composition of plasma
and include metabolizable anions that reduce the chloride load and help maintain acid–base
balance. RCTs and meta-analyses have demonstrated lower rates of AKI outcomes and
126

mortality in adults and lower incidence of RRT and AKI in children with use of buffered
crystalloids compared with 0.9% saline. Overall, outside of specific situations (fluid
administration in traumatic brain injury, and volume expansion for prevention of tumor lysis,
heme pigment- and contrast-associated AKI), buffered crystalloids offer better kidney and
patient outcomes than 0.9% saline for children and adults, though availability may be limited
and cost implications are relatively greater for these solutions in low- and middle-resource
settings.

AF
T

The Work Group judged that the balance of benefits and harms favors buffered
crystalloids over 0.9% saline for volume expansion in most people with or at risk of AKI or
AKD. This recommendation excludes people with traumatic brain injury, in whom
maintenance of higher serum osmolality and avoidance of potential increases in intracranial
pressure are prioritized, and patients with tumor lysis syndrome (Practice Point 3.7) or
rhabdomyolysis (Practice Point 3.8.1) where buffered crystalloids are understudied, and
those receiving intravenous crystalloids for prevention of contrast-associated AKI
(Recommendation 4.9.2.1).
Recommendation 3.1.3: For children and adults with AKI or AKD who have severe
metabolic acidosis with acidemia (pH <7.20), we suggest the use of intravenous
bicarbonate over RRT unless there is another urgent indication for RRT (2C).

R

Intravenous sodium bicarbonate can correct metabolic acidosis, attenuate hyperkalemia, and
potentially stabilize hemodynamics, thereby decreasing the application of RRT. However,
RRT should be initiated promptly if there is another urgent indication, such as refractory
hyperkalemia, severe volume overload, or symptomatic uremia. Healthcare professionals
should monitor for potential complications of bicarbonate therapy, including volume
expansion, hypernatremia, and paradoxical intracellular acidosis.

D

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Metabolic acidosis with severe acidemia is regarded as an indication for RRT unless
corrected medically. Sodium bicarbonate therapy is typically administered as either an
isotonic infusion or a hypertonic 4.2% or 8.4% infusion. However, these solutions may be
associated with complications related to volume overload and shifts in systemic pH. Potential
benefits with the use of sodium bicarbonate therapy in this setting are improvement in pH
and hyperkalemia as well as a better response to vasoactive medications.
A meta-analysis of RCTs comparing intravenous bicarbonate versus usual care in
children and adults with metabolic acidosis with and without AKI showed a lower incidence
of RRT (4 trials, 1071 participants; RR: 0.69; 95% CI: 0.60–0.80) but no significant
127

differences in mortality (4 trials, 1140 participants; RR: 0.88; 95% CI: 0.71–1.07), length of
ICU or hospital stay, or incidence of MAKE90 (Supplementary Table S45).359-365

AF
T

A pivotal study in this field was the Sodium bicarbonate therapy for patients with
severe metabolic acidemia in the ICU (BICAR-ICU) trial, a 26-center, open-label, RCT.360
Adults admitted to the ICU with severe acidosis (defined as pH ≤7.20 with a paCO 2 ≤45 mm
Hg and serum bicarbonate concentration ≤20 mmol/l) and with a Sequential Organ Failure
Assessment (SOFA) score ≥4 or an arterial lactate ≥2 mmol/l were randomized to receive
treatment with 4.2% sodium bicarbonate infusion aiming to keep arterial pH ≥7.30 or
placebo. The primary outcome was a composite of death by day 28 and at least one organ
failure at day 7. Although there was no overall difference with regards to the primary
outcome, in a prespecified analysis focused on participants with Stage 2 or 3 AKI (as defined
by the AKIN criteria), survival at day 28 was higher in the bicarbonate arm compared to
control (54%; 95% CI: 45%–65% vs. 37%; 95% CI: 28%–48%, p=0·0283). The use of RRT
was lower in participants with AKI treated with sodium bicarbonate (51% vs. 73%, p=0.002).

D

R

Subsequently, the second RCT of sodium bicarbonate in the ICU (BICARICU-2)
evaluated whether intravenous 4.2% sodium bicarbonate therapy targeting a serum pH ≥7.30
compared with no intravenous sodium bicarbonate therapy could improve outcomes in
critically ill adults with severe acidemia and Stage 2 or 3 AKI.361 In this trial, intravenous
sodium bicarbonate therapy had no effect on 90-day mortality (62.1% vs. 61.7%; absolute
difference: 0.4; 95% CI: −7.2 to 8.0). However, a secondary endpoint of RRT use was
reduced in adults receiving intravenous sodium bicarbonate (35% vs. 50%; absolute
difference: –15.5; 95% CI: –23.1 to –7.8). Among participants who received RRT, the time
to initiation was longer in those allocated to intravenous sodium bicarbonate therapy
compared with controls (30.9 hours vs. 15.5 hours). The findings of this trial thus suggest
that intravenous sodium bicarbonate can delay or avoid the use of RRT in critically ill adults
with severe acidemia and moderate to severe AKI, with no greater risk of adverse events.
One limitation of the trial was that it was an open-label trial.
In children, the evidence for bicarbonate in AKI is limited. In an open label RCT, the
efficacy and safety of bicarbonate infusion to correct bicarbonate deficit was compared to
rehydration therapy in 50 children in India with acute diarrhea and severe dehydration with
severe non-anion gap metabolic acidemia.365 The group treated with additional bicarbonate
infusion experienced a shorter time to resolution of metabolic acidemia, greater acidemia
resolution by 8 hours and 16 hours, less vasoactive use, fewer adverse events, and shorter
duration of mechanical ventilation.

128

Certainty of evidence
There is high certainty of evidence that in children and adults who are critically ill
with acidosis, intravenous bicarbonate reduces the risk of RRT. There is low to moderate
certainty of evidence of no effect on mortality, other kidney outcomes, or harms.359-365 The
evidence base included 6 studies in adults and one in children,365 with consistent findings
across studies of children and adults. The certainty of evidence for outcomes other than RRT
was downgraded for methodological limitations, imprecision, and/or sparseness of data.
Given the higher certainty of evidence of an effect regarding RRT than other outcomes, the
overall certainty of evidence was graded as high.

AF
T

Values and preferences
This recommendation places a high value on avoiding the risks and resource intensity
associated with RRT, including vascular access complications, hemodynamic instability, and
exposure to extracorporeal therapies, particularly in settings where RRT may be limited or
delayed. It places a lower value on the potential for incomplete or transient correction of
acidemia with intravenous bicarbonate therapy. Patient and healthcare professional
preferences regarding invasiveness of therapy, availability of RRT, and anticipated
reversibility of acidosis may influence decision-making. Patients and healthcare professionals
may reasonably choose RRT earlier when there is limited response to bicarbonate therapy or
other urgent indications for RRT are present.

D

R

Resource use and costs
Intravenous sodium bicarbonate is widely available, relatively inexpensive, and can
be administered in most acute care settings without specialized equipment or personnel. In
contrast, RRT requires substantial resources, including equipment, trained staff, vascular
access, and monitoring, and may be limited by availability, particularly in resourceconstrained settings. Use of bicarbonate therapy in appropriate patients may reduce or delay
the need for RRT and its associated costs. However, bicarbonate administration requires
monitoring for treatment response and may not obviate the need for RRT in people with
persistent or worsening acidosis or other indications. Local resource availability and
institutional expertise may influence decision-making.
Considerations for implementation
Bicarbonate is typically administered intravenously. When administered as an
isotonic infusion, bicarbonate is often given in a 5% dextrose solution and can lead to
significant hyperglycemia. More concentrated bicarbonate solutions (4.2% and 8.4%) are
significantly hypertonic and can result in hypernatremia. Bicarbonate can lower ionized
calcium and potassium levels due to changes in systemic pH. If sodium bicarbonate therapy
is administered very rapidly (e.g., as a “push” dose) in people with severe respiratory failure,
the inability to ventilate off newly generated carbon dioxide may result in a transient
129

worsening of acidemia.366 Bicarbonate is incompatible with a number of intravenous
medications and often requires a dedicated lumen for infusion, which may be a challenge in a
person with limited intravenous access. In case of extravasation, hypertonic bicarbonate can
cause severe skin necrosis due to its chemical properties.
Rationale
Severe metabolic acidosis is a common complication of severe AKI and may
contribute to hemodynamic instability, impaired myocardial contractility, and increased
respiratory workload. Intravenous sodium bicarbonate can rapidly increase systemic pH and
buffer excess hydrogen ions, thereby mitigating the physiological consequences of acidemia.
Bicarbonate may increase responsiveness to vasoactive drugs in people with shock.

AF
T

RCTs suggest that bicarbonate therapy can correct acidemia and reduce the need for
RRT in people with severe metabolic acidosis and moderate-to-severe AKI, likely by
attenuating both acidemia and hyperkalemia as both can trigger the decision to start RRT.
However, effects on mortality and other patient-important outcomes remain uncertain. RRT
can correct acid–base disturbances but is invasive, resource-intensive, and associated with
risks, including vascular access complications and hemodynamic instability. In the absence
of other urgent indications for RRT, an initial trial of intravenous bicarbonate may stabilize
patients and allow time for kidney recovery.

R

Practice Point 3.1.1: Offer oral rehydration to children and adults at risk of or with
AKI or AKD being managed in settings where volume expansion with intravenous fluid
administration is not possible or practical.

D

Given the significant morbidity and mortality associated with AKI in settings where
intravenous fluid administration is not feasible, oral hydration can be a practical, low-cost,
and life-saving intervention for volume resuscitation and should be offered to children and
adults at risk of or with AKI, provided there are no contraindications to oral intake. The
World Health Organization (WHO) explicitly recommends oral rehydration therapy as the
first-line treatment for mild-to-moderate dehydration and recognizes it as a critical, lifesaving intervention in community and healthcare settings without intravenous access
(https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/diarrhoeal-disease).
Recommendation 3.1.4: For adults undergoing elective major abdominal surgery, we
recommend a liberal intravenous fluid management strategy, aiming for a positive fluid
balance gain of 1–2 kg at 24 hours after surgery, over a restrictive strategy (net zero
fluid balance) (1B).

130

This recommendation puts a high value on the RCT evidence demonstrating the superiority
of a liberal intravenous fluid regimen to achieve normovolemia compared with a restrictive
fluid management regimen for preventing AKI and the need for RRT among adults receiving
elective major abdominal surgery. It places a higher value on the benefits of reducing the
incidence of AKI and RRT over the potential harm of increasing the incidence of pulmonary
edema with a liberal fluid strategy. It acknowledges that additional fluid administration can
be needed for resuscitation of unstable patients to achieve hemodynamic stability, euvolemia,
and tissue perfusion in the perioperative period.

AF
T

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Observational studies have shown that both excessive and insufficient perioperative
fluid administration are associated with increased length of hospital stay and morbidity,
including AKI.367-370

D

R

The REstrictive Versus LIbEral Fluid Therapy in Major Abdominal Surgery
(RELIEF) trial was a large, pragmatic, multicenter RCT of almost 3000 participants
undergoing major elective abdominal surgery that compared a restrictive with a liberal
intravenous fluid approach.371 Participants assigned to the restrictive fluid group had a body
weight increase of 0.3 kg versus 1.6 kg in the liberal fluid group in the first 24 hours after
surgery. The primary outcome, disability-free survival at 1 year, was similar in both groups.
However, the occurrence of AKI (8.6% vs. 5.0%; RR: 1.72; 95% CI: 1.30–2.27) and the need
for RRT (0.9% vs. 0.3%; RR: 3.24; 95% CI: 1.06–9.92) were significantly higher in
participants randomized to restrictive fluid management, while the incidence of pulmonary
edema (1.4% vs. 2.2%) was non-significantly higher in the group that received fluids more
liberally. The increase in the absolute risk of RRT (7 excess events per 1000) was
numerically similar to the reduction in pulmonary edema (8 fewer events per 1000) with a
restrictive versus liberal fluid approach. Compared with pulmonary edema, which is typically
reversible and amenable to prompt medical management, incident RRT represents a
substantially more severe and consequential complication, associated with higher morbidity,
prolonged hospitalization, and potential long-term kidney disease. Seven other much smaller
trials mostly support the findings of the RELIEF trial, except that RRT was less common
across the other trials, yielding a less precise estimate of the effect of fluid restriction on need
for RRT (summary RR: 1.96; 95% CI: 0.73–5.25; Supplementary Table S46).371-375
In light of these relative benefits and harms, providing liberal intravenous fluids to
achieve an euvolemia and a mildly positive fluid balance at the end of surgery can be
considered preferable to restricting intravenous fluid administration with the aim of zero
balance within the first 24 hours of major elective abdominal surgery. This recommendation
applies to stable adults going for elective abdominal surgeries. Fluid administration may need
131

to be adjusted for adults with hypotension or hypovolemia in the perioperative period based
on volume status and fluid losses and according to dynamic assessments of fluid
responsiveness where available. The majority of evidence comparing liberal versus
restrictive fluid management was generated in patients undergoing major elective nonabdominal surgery.376

AF
T

Certainty of evidence
There is moderate certainty of evidence that, in adults undergoing major elective
abdominal surgery, a liberal fluid strategy decreases the risk of AKI, Stage 3 AKI, and
possibly RRT, with no difference in mortality or fluid-related adverse events.371-375, 377-379
The certainty of evidence was downgraded primarily for sparseness of studies supporting the
conclusions, because summary estimates largely recapitulated a single large trial, or
imprecision of effect estimates.

D

R

Values and preferences
Intravenous fluids are universally administered during and after major surgery. The
significant decrease in risk of AKI provides a reason for patients to prefer a liberal fluid
strategy because patients typically view RRT as highly undesirable because of the additional
burden and experience with this treatment and its association with need for long-term RRT,
prolonged hospitalization, and risk of CKD. Although pulmonary complications related to
fluid overload (e.g., pulmonary edema) are also clinically important, these are often
amenable to effective medical management, and patients may prefer to accept a modestly
higher risk of transient and mild (about 1–2 liters) volume overload over an increased risk of
AKI or requirement for RRT, which carry greater immediate and long-term burdens.
Accordingly, many patients and healthcare professionals will prioritize strategies that
minimize the risk of AKI, including a slightly higher fluid balance perioperatively, provided
that fluid administration remains judicious and balanced against potential harms of fluid
excess.
Resource use and costs
A liberal fluid strategy does not markedly change the costs directly related to fluid
administration itself, as the additional resource use associated with delivering a liberal fluid
strategy is minimal. On the other hand, for every 167 people treated, one person will avoid
the costs and resources associated with RRT. A strategy that minimizes avoidable AKI has
the potential to reduce hospital length of stay, critical care use, dialysis resources, and postdischarge health care utilization that has been associated with AKI, thereby favorably
influencing overall cost and resource burden.

132

Considerations for implementation
Implementation of a liberal perioperative fluid strategy requires clear institutional
protocols that define target fluid goals and emphasize avoidance of both under-resuscitation
and excessive fluid loading. Education of anesthesia, surgical, and postoperative care teams
is important to ensure shared understanding of the evidence from the RELIEF trial,
particularly the higher risk of AKI observed with restrictive strategies despite no
improvement in disability-free survival. Healthcare professional training should acknowledge
that fluid administration should be accompanied by regular reassessment using clinical and
hemodynamic parameters (e.g., BP, urine output, lactate, and dynamic measures of fluid
responsiveness where available) rather than rigid adherence to fixed volumes.

AF
T

Integration with existing enhanced recovery after surgery (ERAS) pathways should
be undertaken thoughtfully, as many ERAS programs emphasize restrictive fluid approaches.
The RELIEF trial was a pragmatic trial that allowed healthcare professionals to provide
boluses or adjust administration of intravenous crystalloids, colloids, bloods products, and
use of vasopressors as deemed clinically appropriate in response to hypotension and
hypovolemia, thus individual patient factors should be considered when applying this
recommendation. Of note, the RELIEF trial included patients undergoing elective major
abdominal surgery. Whether there is a role for liberal perioperative fluid management in
major non-abdominal surgery is uncertain.

D

R

Rationale
Perioperative fluid management seeks to maintain euvolemia and adequate tissue
perfusion and organ function while minimizing the risks of both fluid overload and underresuscitation. The RELIEF trial; a large, pragmatic RCT in adults undergoing major
abdominal surgery; directly compared a restrictive versus a liberal intravenous fluid strategy.
Although the trial did not demonstrate a difference in the primary outcome of disability-free
survival at 1 year, it showed that the restrictive strategy was associated with a higher
incidence of AKI compared with a liberal fluid approach. This finding suggests that too
stringent fluid restriction may compromise renal perfusion and increase the risk of AKI,
including RRT.
Given that AKI is linked to increased morbidity, longer hospital stays, and greater
health care resource use, the evidence supports a moderate liberal fluid strategy targeting a
modest positive fluid balance to reduce AKI and need for RRT without incurring excessive
harm from fluid excess. The recommendation reflects a balance between ensuring adequate
intravascular volume to support organ perfusion and avoiding unnecessary fluid overload,
with appreciation of patient-centered outcomes and safety.

133

3.2 Hemodynamic management
Practice Point 3.2.1: Use hemodynamic monitoring strategies for adults at risk of and
with AKI to assess adequate organ perfusion and oxygen delivery, which will be
context-sensitive and resource availability dependent.

AF
T

Hemodynamic monitoring is intended to ensure maintenance of adequate
intravascular volume, cardiac output, and tissue oxygenation.380 Autoregulatory mechanisms
regulate kidney blood flow within a broad range of pressures to preserve a stable GFR.
Preexisting conditions including CKD and hypertension, and events including sepsis, major
surgery and AKI itself, may disrupt kidney autoregulation, contributing to ischemia and
AKI.381 Recognition and correction of inadequate organ perfusion are central to AKI
prevention and mitigation in vulnerable people. Hemodynamic monitoring provides a
framework to guide timely and individualized interventions aimed at maintaining sufficient
kidney blood flow and systemic oxygen delivery while avoiding harm from overresuscitation. Large observational studies have shown that the degree and duration of
hypotension during major surgery and critical illness are associated with AKI and major
adverse kidney events.382, 383 The Intraoperative Norepinephrine to Control Arterial Pressure
(INPRESS) study reported a significantly lower risk of postoperative organ dysfunction,
including AKI in adults who received an individualized BP management strategy compared
to standard BP management during major surgery.380 However, subsequent RCTs did not
confirm these findings.384-386

D

R

The choice and intensity of hemodynamic monitoring should be tailored to the
clinical context, severity of illness, and available resources. In all settings, careful clinical
assessment, including trends in BP, heart rate, urine output, mental status, capillary refill, and
peripheral perfusion are fundamental. Where available, adjunctive tools for continuous BP
monitoring, pulse oximetry, serum lactate measurement, and bedside ultrasound can enhance
assessment of intravascular volume status, cardiac function, and organ perfusion. In higheracuity environments, advanced (invasive or minimally invasive) hemodynamic monitoring
(e.g., arterial catheters, central venous pressure monitoring, or advanced cardiac output
monitoring) may be considered to support complex decision-making.
Establishing advanced hemodynamic monitoring is relatively common in high
resource settings.387 Invasive devices like pulmonary artery catheters are associated with
potential complications, including thrombosis, bleeding, and infection, which may negatively
affect patients’ outcomes and increase costs and resource utilization. Increasingly, less
invasive tools like echocardiography are used to determine cardiac output and monitor
haemodynamics.387

134

The additional costs for using advanced hemodynamic monitoring need to be
considered against the benefits of optimizing a patient’s hemodynamics, including greater
resource use and longer stay in the ICU and hospital. Therefore, the choice of hemodynamic
monitoring strategy should balance goals to optimize perfusion while minimizing iatrogenic
injury. In resource-limited settings, reliance on structured clinical assessment and basic
monitoring can still support effective hemodynamic management and AKI risk reduction.

AF
T

Children have unique cardiovascular physiology and limited autoregulatory capacity,
making them especially vulnerable to hypotension and fluctuations in cardiac output. Kidney
autoregulation is immature in neonates and can be easily disrupted by critical illness,
congenital heart disease, or sepsis, leading to impaired kidney blood flow even when
systemic pressures appear adequate. There are no RCTs evaluating advanced hemodynamic
monitoring for AKI prevention in pediatric populations. The Assessment of Worldwide
Acute Kidney Injury Epidemiology in Neonates study (AWAKEN) identified an association
between hemodynamic instability, including hypotension and vasopressor use, and increased
risk of AKI in neonates.35 Similarly, in children undergoing cardiac surgery, multiple studies
have demonstrated that low perfusion pressure, high vasoactive-inotropic scores, and
prolonged cardiopulmonary bypass times are independently associated with increased AKI
incidence.388-391

R

Practice Point 3.2.2: Use vasoactive medications in conjunction with fluids in children
and adults with hypotension not responsive to initial fluid administration and who are
at risk of or have AKI.

D

The maintenance of adequate BP and oxygen delivery to organs is a key aspect of
resuscitation and hemodynamic support. In many people with sepsis, bleeding, or other forms
of shock, an adequate mean arterial pressure (MAP) cannot be maintained with fluid
resuscitation alone, and vasoactive medications are necessary. Hypotension is a strong risk
factor for development and progression of AKI, and hemodynamic optimization is a key
component of the kidney-protection strategy.
The costs of the most common vasoactive medications are relatively low, but some
vasopressors have higher costs. Further, not all vasoactive medications are available in all
regions. While vasoactive medications are typically administered through central venous
catheters, the peripheral administration of a vasopressor, like norepinephrine, for a limited
period (usually up to 6 hours) and at a low dose can be both expedient and safe using
explicit protocols.392
Repeated assessments of fluid status, hemodynamics, and fluid responsiveness are
needed to guide management and to identify the time point when further fluid administration
135

is no longer beneficial and/or vasopressor support is needed (alone or in combination with
fluids).
Recommendation 3.2.1: We suggest a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of >65 mm Hg as a
target to guide fluid and vasopressor administration in critically ill adults at high risk
of or with AKI (2C).
Practice Point 3.2.3: Higher or lower MAP targets may be appropriate for individual
critically ill adults, for instance to maintain renal perfusion in patients with chronic
hypertension and to avoid adverse effects of excessive vasopressor therapy in patients
with chronic hypotension.

AF
T

This recommendation puts a high value on targeting adequate perfusion pressure to maintain
organ function. The suggested MAP target of >65 mm Hg should be interpreted as a general
guide rather than a fixed threshold and may require individualization based on baseline BP.
Higher MAP targets may be necessary to maintain adequate renal perfusion, while in others,
lower targets may be acceptable to avoid excessive vasopressor exposure or fluid
administration. The MAP should be considered alongside other indicators of perfusion and
kidney function and integrated within a multimodal hemodynamic management strategy.

D

R

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
The potential benefits of targeting a MAP >65 mm Hg include improved organ
perfusion, including kidney blood flow, maintenance of glomerular filtration, prevention of
progression of AKI, and positively modifying the trajectory of AKI. A MAP-based target
provides a practical and widely applicable framework to guide fluid resuscitation and
vasopressor therapy, particularly in dynamic critical care environments. The potential harms
relate primarily to the interventions used to achieve the MAP target rather than the target
itself. Excessive fluid administration may contribute to complications of fluid overload.
Increased vasopressor exposure may be associated with arrhythmias, peripheral and
mesenteric ischemia, increased myocardial oxygen demand, and decreased cardiac output. In
some subgroups of people, including those with chronic hypertension or advanced vascular
disease, a MAP of >65 mm Hg may be insufficient, while in others, higher targets may
increase the risk of treatment-related adverse effects without clear additional benefit.
Targeting a specific MAP without considering other indices of perfusion or adverse effects
has led to ambiguous results from trials comparing MAP targets, so that MAP threshold
should not be considered in isolation.
Meta-analysis of 2 RCTs comparing higher versus lower MAP targets in critically ill
participants with chronic hypertension showed that targeting a higher MAP was associated
136

with a significantly lower risk of AKI (RR: 0.75; 95% CI: 0.59–0.95) and need for RRT (RR:
0.83; 95% CI: 0.71–0.97) but also a higher risk of mortality (RR: 1.19; 95% CI: 1.01–1.40)
when compared with a lower MAP target (Supplementary Table S47).393, 394 In these trials,
MAP targets were 80–85 mm Hg versus 65–70 mm Hg (with mean achieved MAPs of 85
mm Hg vs. 75 mm Hg),395 75–80 mm Hg versus 60–65 mm Hg (with mean achieved MAPs
of 79 mm Hg vs. 70 mm Hg),393 and usual care versus 60–65 mm Hg (with mean achieved
MAPs of 73 mm Hg vs. 68 mm Hg).394

AF
T

A single RCT explored the role of higher versus lower MAP targets in adults with
chronic hypertension undergoing cardiac surgery and showed that targeting a MAP ≥70
mmHg during cardiopulmonary bypass was associated with a higher risk of postoperative
AKI (RR: 4.59; 95% CI: 1.02–20.71) and uncertain effect on mortality (RR: 9.09; 95% CI:
0.50–166.7; Supplementary Table S48).396 In one trial investigating participants with chronic
hypertension undergoing non-cardiac surgery, there was no statistically significant difference
in the incidence of AKI, need for RRT or mortality between participants with a higher (≥80
mm Hg) or lower (≥65 mm Hg) MAP target (Supplementary Table S49).397 Across 3 RCTs
that individualized MAP targets in participants, there were no significant benefits (or harms)
of targeting higher MAP targets, but in one study that targeted individualized MAP goals
within 10% of the patient’s individual reference value during major non-cardiac surgery,
there was a lower incidence of AKI (adjusted RR: 0.70; 95% CI: 0.52–0.92) and lower risk
of needing RRT (adjusted RR: 0.85; 95% CI: 0.29–2.48) with no difference in risk of
mortality (Supplementary Table S50).380, 384, 386

D

R

A limitation of these RCTs in critically ill participants is that they evaluated different
MAP thresholds during the stabilization phase but not at the initial phase of resuscitation.
Further, blood flow of different organs depends on organ-specific perfusion pressure which is
determined by the difference between inflow and outflow pressure and autoregulatory
processes. The MAP value at which organ blood flow is directly dependent on perfusion
pressure varies across organs.398 These considerations and evaluation of all vital organs need
to be considered when setting MAP targets in clinical practice. The target MAP to prevent
AKI in people who are not critically ill or not scheduled to have major surgery is not known.
When vasopressor support is indicated, norepinephrine remains the most frequently
used medication. However, norepinephrine is not available worldwide. There are a variety of
vasopressors available in clinical practice, with differing mechanisms of actions and potential
benefits and harms. Furthermore, these vasopressors differ in how they impact kidney
function (Table 21).

137

Table 21 | Vasopressors for management of adults with or at risk of AKI*
Drug
Characteristics
Rationale for use in AKI
• Better renal perfusion in
septic shock compared to
other catecholamines
• Possibly preferential
constriction of efferent
glomerular arteriole
resulting in increased GFR
• Augmentation of diuresis
• Regulation of urine
osmolality resulting in
change in urine volume

Terlipressin

• Synthetic
vasopressin
analogue

• Greater selectivity for the
V1-receptor and longer
half-life than vasopressin

Phenylephrine

• Pure α1 agonist

• Possible beneficial effects
on hepato-splanchnic
perfusion in septic shock

D
R

Vasopressin

• No significant difference in RRT in people with septic
shock between norepinephrine versus dopamine (SOAP II
study399)
• Lower rate of progression from AKI RIFLE Risk to RIFLE
Failure or Loss or RRT in people with septic shock
randomized to vasopressin compared to norepinephrine
(VASST trial400)
• No difference in kidney failure-free days but higher urine
volumes and lower rate of RRT with early addition of
vasopressin to noradrenaline in septic shock (VANISH
trial401)
• Less kidney injury in people with vasoplegic shock after
cardiac surgery with vasopressin compared to
norepinephrine (VANCS trial402).
• Significantly lower rise in serum creatinine but no
difference in RRT with continuous infusion of low-dose
terlipressin as 1st line vasopressor in septic shock
(TERLIVAP trial403).
• No difference in urine output and creatinine clearance
between phenylephrine and norepinephrine for septic
shock404

AF
T

• α1, α2, β1, β2
and β3 receptor
agonist
• Endogenous
hormone
• V1 and V2
receptor agonist

Norepinephrine

Evidence from RCTs

• Endogenous
• Stronger vasoconstrictive
• Faster liberation from RRT with angiotensin compared to
hormone
effect on glomerular
placebo in people with refractory vasoplegic shock on
efferent arteriolar tone than
noradrenaline (sub-analysis of ATHOS-3 study405)
• Part of reninafferent arteriole
angiotensinaldosterone-axis
Selepressin
• Analog of
• Vasopressin agonist with
• No difference in urine output compared to placebo in
vasopressin,
less non-vascular adverse
people with septic shock treated with norepinephrine406
agonist of V1A
effects than vasopressin
receptor
*There is no compelling rationale to use either epinephrine or dopamine in people with or at risk for AKI to prevent or manage AKI, though these agents may
be used clinically to keep MAP at target. Reproduced from Busse et al.407 Abbreviations: AKI, acute kidney injury; ATHOS-3, Angiotensin for the Treatment
Angiotensin II

138

D
R

AF
T

of High Output Shock phase IIB-III trial GFR, glomerular filtration rate; RIFLE, Risk, Injury, Failure, Loss of kidney function, and End-stage kidney disease
classification of acute kidney injury; RRT, renal replacement therapy; SOAP II, Sepsis Occurrence in Acutely Ill Patients II trial (Comparison of Dopamine
and Norepinephrine in the Treatment of Shock); TERLIVAP, Continuous terlipressin versus vasopressin infusion in septic shock trial; VANCS, Vasopressin
versus Norepinephrine in Patients with Vasoplegic Shock after Cardiac Surgery trial; VANISH, Vasopressin vs Norepinephrine as Initial Therapy in Septic
Shock trial; VASST, Vasopressin and Septic Shock Trial

139

Certainty of evidence
For critically ill adults with chronic hypertension, there is moderate certainty of evidence
that treating adults with high MAP goals (target MAP ≥70 mm Hg) results in lower risk of
the need for RRT, but with a higher risk of mortality. There is low certainty of evidence of a
lower risk of AKI.393-395 The certainty of evidence was downgraded for some methodological
limitations of the RCTs and, for AKI, sparse data (1 large study).393-395 Given the conflicting
direction of effect between mortality and AKI-related outcomes, the overall certainty of
evidence was graded as low.

AF
T

Based on a single RCT, for adults with chronic hypertension undergoing cardiac surgery,
there is low certainty of evidence that treating people with high MAP goals (target MAP ≥70
mm Hg) results in higher risk of AKI, but no evidence of an effect on mortality or need for
RRT.396 The certainty of evidence was downgraded for sparse data and imprecise data. 396
For adults with chronic hypertension undergoing non-cardiac surgery, there is very low
certainty suggesting no difference in mortality or AKI outcomes between those treated with
high (target MAP ≥80 mm Hg) and lower MAP goals.397, 408 The certainty of evidence was
downgraded for sparse data (single study for most outcomes), imprecision, and
inconsistency.397, 408

R

Also for adults with chronic hypertension undergoing non-cardiac surgery, there is low
certainty of evidence that individualized MAP goals (which varied across RCTs) do not
affect mortality, AKI outcomes, or serious adverse events.380, 384, 386 The certainty of evidence
was downgraded for methodological limitations of the trials, inconsistency (pertaining to
effect on AKI), and imprecision.380, 384, 386

D

Values and preferences
Maintenance of an adequate MAP is a fundamental component of supportive care that
aligns with healthcare professional and patient priorities to preserve organ function during
critical illness. A MAP threshold of >65 mm Hg is familiar to healthcare professionals,
facilitates timely decision-making, and supports standardized care while allowing for bedside
clinical judgment, evaluation of response, and individualization. Targeting a higher or lower
MAP will lead to administration of more or fewer vasoactive medications and fluid. A lower
value was placed on strict adherence to a single BP target in all people, acknowledging
heterogeneity in baseline BP, comorbid conditions, and tolerance of fluids or vasopressors.
Patients and healthcare professionals may differ in their preferences regarding the balance
between avoiding hypotension and minimizing exposure to fluids and vasopressors,
particularly when these therapies carry risks of harm.

140

The Work Group also considered patient values related to overall goals of care,
comfort, and avoidance of treatment-related complications. In some clinical contexts,
particularly in patients with limited physiological reserve or advanced illness, patients may
prioritize minimizing invasive interventions over aggressive BP targets.
Resource use and costs
Higher MAP targets will necessitate greater use of vasoactive medications (higher
doses and longer duration) and likely administration of more fluid. The incremental resource
use associated with this target is expected to be low, as it does not mandate additional
diagnostic testing or equipment beyond standard care.

AF
T

The Work Group acknowledged that in some settings, particularly resource-limited
environments, access to continuous BP monitoring or vasoactive medications may be
constrained. In such contexts, healthcare professionals may rely on intermittent monitoring
and clinical signs of perfusion to approximate MAP targets. Despite these limitations, the
recommended MAP threshold remains relevant as a guiding principle for hemodynamic
management.

D

R

Considerations for implementation
It is important to note that in trials targeting a particular MAP, protocol adherence
was variable. For instance, in the 65 Trial (RCT comparing MAP target >65 mm Hg vs.
permissive hypotension with a MAP target of 60–65 mm Hg in critically ill patients aged
≥65), the actual delivered MAP differed significantly from the prescribed MAP goals (i.e.,
the MAP achieved in the permissive hypotension arm [target MAP 60–65] was 66.7 mm
Hg).394 These results reflect the challenge to achieve and maintain exact MAP targets, even
in the setting of a clinical trial. Other challenges exist when people need vasopressor support
but also medications that may potentially lower the MAP, for instance, beta-blockers for
coronary artery disease. In these cases, an individualized risk assessment is needed to guide
specific management.
Achieving the MAP target requires judicious use of intravenous fluids and
vasopressors, guided by ongoing assessment of volume status, cardiac function, and overall
tissue perfusion. Fluids should be administered cautiously to avoid volume overload,
especially in people with established AKI or limited cardiac reserve. Vasopressor therapy
should be titrated to the lowest effective dose to achieve the target MAP, with close
monitoring for adverse effects. MAP should not be used in isolation but rather as part of a
multimodal assessment of end-organ perfusion. Regular reassessment is essential,
particularly during changes in clinical condition or therapeutic interventions. The
international, multicenter ANDROMEDA-SHOCK-2 trial randomized 1467 adults with early
septic shock and showed that individualized hemodynamic management to tailor fluids,
141

vasopressors, and inotropes was superior to usual care, in particular with regards to duration
of vital support, including duration of RRT.409

AF
T

Rationale
Observational studies and RCTs in critically ill populations have consistently
demonstrated associations between the duration and severity of hypotension and adverse
kidney outcomes, including higher rates of AKI, need for RRT, and mortality.410, 411
Targeting a MAP >65 mm Hg to guide fluid administration and vasopressor support in
critically ill adults is recommended based on RCTs that have not shown benefit of routinely
targeting higher MAP levels for kidney outcomes. Higher targets are associated with
increased exposure to fluids and vasopressors. Accordingly, a MAP of >65 mm Hg
represents a balance between avoiding renal hypoperfusion and limiting treatment-related
harms.
A MAP target is readily measurable, familiar to healthcare professionals, and can be
implemented across diverse critical care settings. Importantly, MAP should be interpreted in
the context of individual patient characteristics, as patients with chronic hypertension or
altered vascular autoregulation may require higher perfusion pressures to maintain adequate
kidney blood flow.

R

The Work Group judged that targeting a MAP of >65 mm Hg is supported by
moderate-certainty evidence, strong biological plausibility, and extensive clinical experience.
Given the variability in patient response and the potential risks associated with aggressive
hemodynamic support, the recommendation is Level 2 and emphasizes individualized
application within a multimodal strategy for kidney protection.

D

Recommendation 3.2.2: We recommend against using low-dose dopamine for kidney
protection in children or adults at risk of or with AKI or AKD (1A).
Low-dose dopamine has been used to improve renal perfusion based on the physiological
principle that dopaminergic receptor stimulation increases kidney blood flow, which in turn
increases GFR. However, there is consistent evidence that low-dose dopamine does not
prevent AKI, improve kidney recovery, or reduce the need for RRT and may cause harm.
Dopamine may still be indicated for other hemodynamic purposes according to standard
critical care practice, but such use should not be expected to confer kidney benefit and
should not be used with the intent of preventing or treating AKI.

142

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
No benefit has been demonstrated with dopamine at a low dose in terms of any
clinical or kidney outcome. This evidence was previously reviewed in the KDIGO 2012 AKI
guideline, and this recommendation has not changed. Subsequent trials of low-dose
dopamine have examined dopamine in people with acute heart failure and abnormal kidney
function (e.g., ROSE412) and have not shown an improvement in decongestion.

AF
T

Evidence from well-performed clinical studies to support the use of low-dose
dopamine for children with or at risk for AKI is lacking. A systematic review analyzed 7
studies evaluating its effects on kidney function and 13 studies on urine output, all conducted
in neonatal or pediatric ICUs.413 The investigators reported no evidence that low-dose
dopamine improved kidney function or increased urine volume in children.
Certainty of evidence
Based on evidence summarized in the KDIGO 2012 AKI guideline, there is high
certainty of evidence that low-dose dopamine neither affects risk of AKI in critically ill
patients nor affects clinical outcomes for people with AKI, with some evidence of harms
including tachyarrhythmias and myocardial ischemia.414-416

R

Values and preferences
Because the evidence shows that dopamine is not effective, dopamine administration
is associated with increased cost and exposure of patients to an unnecessary medication with
the potential for serious adverse drug events, including tachycardia and arrhythmias, which
patients and healthcare professionals prefer to avoid.

D

Resource use and costs
Dopamine is often administered via a central venous catheter. Patients may require
admission to an ICU to receive such infusions. Thus, there are significant potential costs
without benefits to the use of dopamine for kidney protection.
Considerations for implementation
This practice does not have evidence of efficacy and low-dose dopamine should not
be part of protocols or order sets intended for kidney protection or treatment of AKI in both
pediatric and adult populations. Education of healthcare professionals may be needed to
address persistent misconceptions regarding low-dose dopamine and to reinforce the
evidence demonstrating lack of benefit and potential harm.

143

Rationale
The rationale for the use of dopamine is from experimental studies showing that
dopaminergic receptors are present in the kidney and that their stimulation leads to increased
blood flow. The inference has been that such an increase in blood flow would lead to an
increase in GFR and thereby improve kidney function. However, clinical studies have not
demonstrated beneficial effects on AKI or related clinical outcomes.
Recommendation 3.2.3: We recommend the use of a multicomponent kidney-protection
strategy in adult surgical patients at high risk for AKI identified by clinical factors and
biomarkers (Figure 9; 1B).

AF
T

Practice Point 3.2.4: In children and adults with established AKI or AKD, kidneyprotection strategies should be considered.

R

This recommendation puts a high value on the RCT evidence demonstrating that the
implementation of a multicomponent kidney-protection strategy in people at high risk for AKI
reduced the incidence of moderate or severe AKI compared with standard care. A
multicomponent kidney-protection strategy typically includes optimization of hemodynamics
and volume status, avoidance or minimization of nephrotoxic exposures, appropriate
glycemic control, judicious use of contrast agents, and close monitoring of kidney function.
The specific components and intensity of the strategy may be individualized according to
patient characteristics and resource availability. In settings where biomarker testing is not
available, clinical risk assessments may be used to identify people at high risk. A risk-benefit
assessment and resource utilization often needs to be considered.

D

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
The KDIGO 2012 AKI guideline described a multicomponent kidney-protection
strategy to prevent and manage AKI. The key components are optimization of volume status
and perfusion pressure, discontinuation, and avoidance of nephrotoxic agents when possible,
monitoring of SCr and urine output, use of alternatives to radiocontrast agents, maintenance
of normoglycemia, and consideration of functional hemodynamic monitoring.

144

AF
T

Figure 9 | Multicomponent kidney protection strategy for prevention and management
of AKI. AKI, acute kidney injury
A meta-analysis of 5 RCTs including 1946 adult who were critically ill or undergoing
major non-cardiac or cardiac surgery showed that the application of such a strategy was
associated with a statistically significantly lower risk of Stage 2 or 3 AKI (OR: 0.67; 95% CI:
0.56–0.79) compared to usual care (Supplementary Table S51).2, 4-6 The risk of MAKE90 was
also lower (OR: 0.80; 95% CI: 0.67–0.94) but there was no statistically significant difference
in mortality or application of RRT.

D

R

One of the trials included was the “Prevention of Cardiac Surgery–Associated Acute
Kidney Injury” (PrevAKI) trial, a single-center RCT that showed that implementation of the
kidney-protection strategy in tubular stress biomarker-enriched patient population
significantly decreased the occurrence of postoperative AKI compared with standard care in
people at high risk undergoing cardiac surgery (absolute risk reduction: 16.6%; 95% CI: 5.5–
27.9; P=0.004).4 Similar results were seen in the subsequent multicenter PrevAKI trial.2
Among 278 adults at high risk undergoing cardiac surgery, the occurrence of moderate and
severe AKI was significantly lower in the intervention group as compared to the control
group (14.0% vs. 23.9%; adjusted risk reduction 10.0%; 95% CI, 0.9–19.1; P=0.034). In
exploratory multivariable analysis of participants with complete data on use of kidneyprotection strategy measures (94% of participants), the prevention of hypotension and
discontinuation of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) and angiotensin II
receptor blockers (ARBs) had the strongest association with the primary outcome. 417
The “Biomarker-guided Intervention to Prevent Acute Kidney Injury After Major
Surgery” (BigpAK) trial, another single center RCT that included participants at high risk
undergoing major abdominal surgery, also demonstrated that early optimization of volume
status and discontinuation of nephrotoxic medications in a biomarker-enriched patient
population after surgery reduced the occurrence of Stage 2 or 3 AKI and shortened length of
ICU and hospital stay.5 Subsequently, the BigpAK-2 trial, a multicenter RCT including 1180
adults demonstrated that use of a kidney-protection strategy in participants at high risk for
145

AKI identified by tubular stress biomarkers significantly reduced Stage 2 or stage 3 AKI
after major noncardiovascular or cardiovascular surgery.6

AF
T

Several trials have used tubular stress biomarkers to enrich selection of people at high
risk of AKI into trials. In a meta-analysis of 4 studies including 775 participants, use of a
kidney-protection strategy in people at high risk for AKI identified by elevated tubular stress
biomarkers did not affect the incidence of any stage of AKI (OR: 0.70; 95% CI: 0.43–1.15;
P=0.16) or Stage 1 AKI alone (OR: 1.07; 95% CI: 0.56–2.04; P=0.83) but was associated
with a significantly lower incidence of Stage 2 or 3 AKI compared with standard care (OR:
0.55; 95% CI: 0.39–0.79; P=0.001).418 A meta-analysis of 13 studies (including 5 RCTs)
demonstrated a lower incidence of Stage 2 and 3 AKI, MAKE, and need for RRT among
groups who received “AKI care bundles” (comprising early optimization of fluid status,
maintenance of perfusion pressure, discontinuation of nephrotoxic agents).419 Moreover, the
incorporation of urine biomarkers within care bundles was associated with a lower risk of
MAKE compared to care bundles without biomarkers.
Published trials have not reported any significant harm associated with the
implementation of the kidney-protection strategy. However, some measures have potential
adverse effects or complications. For instance, advanced hemodynamic monitoring and
resuscitation might be associated with bleeding or initiation of catecholamines. Further, to
maintain normoglycemia, the administration of higher amounts of insulin is often necessary
which might increase the risk of hypoglycemia.

D

R

No RCTs have evaluated the full implementation of a kidney-protection strategy in
pediatric populations but observational studies and quality improvement initiatives provide
support for the core components. Nephrotoxin stewardship has been associated with reduced
AKI incidence in hospitalized children; for example, the multicenter Nephrotoxic Injury
Negated by Just-in-time Action (NINJA) program demonstrated a 23% relative risk reduction
in AKI following targeted nephrotoxin surveillance and exposure reduction.420 Pediatric
quality improvement initiatives that incorporate fluid assessment, perfusion optimization, and
kidney function monitoring have demonstrated potential benefit in high-risk settings.421, 422
Certainty of evidence
There is moderate certainty of evidence that in adults who are critically ill or
undergoing major surgery, multicomponent kidney-protection strategies in biomarkerenriched patient populations reduce the risk of Stage 2 or 3 AKI and MAKE90 with no
evidence of an effect on all-cause mortality or need for RRT and no evidence of harm.2, 4-6,
423, 424
The certainty of evidence was reduced for non-blinding of the RCTs.

146

AF
T

Values and preferences
All components of the KDIGO kidney-protection strategy are interventions that are
fully integrated into routine modern clinical care and have known risk-benefit profiles.
However, the kidney protection strategy is only implemented in a minority of patients at high
risk for or with established AKI in daily practice. According to a systematic review, studies
reported an AKI care bundle use in only 9.8% of eligible events.419 Even with the aid of
electronic recognition and interruptive alerts, an AKI bundle was completed within 24 hours
in only 12.2% of AKI episodes.425 The Work Group judged that most high-risk adults
undergoing surgery, as well as their healthcare professionals, would prioritize kidney
protection and avoidance of preventable harm, even when this requires additional
monitoring, coordination of care, or modest increases in resource use. The recommendation
emphasizes a multicomponent approach, recognizing that AKI in the surgical setting is
typically multifactorial and more likely to be prevented by multiple different interventions.
Combining clinical risk factors with biomarkers is valued for enrichment, improving risk
stratification and enabling more targeted application of kidney-protective measures, thereby
minimizing unnecessary interventions, and avoiding the increased complexity of care,
implementation burden, costs, and the possibility of overtreatment in low-risk populations.

D

R

Resource use and costs
All components of the KDIGO kidney-protection strategy can be readily integrated
into routine modern clinical care in high-resource settings but availability may be limited in
low- and middle-resource settings. This strategy is expected to require additional upfront
resource utilization, including costs related to biomarker testing, enhanced clinical
monitoring, multidisciplinary coordination, and clinical decision support, which may be
offset by the reduction in costs in managing AKI. Resource requirements may vary
substantially across healthcare settings depending on the availability of laboratory
infrastructure, perioperative care pathways, and staffing models. The inclusion of biomarkers
to identify early phase AKI likely contributed to prevention of Stage 2 and 3 AKI, but these
biomarkers are not routinely available in clinical practice in all healthcare systems and are
associated with financial costs. Risk stratification using risk factors or prediction models may
be used to target prevention strategies to high-risk populations in settings where biomarkers
are not available. This can likewise help optimize resource allocation by focusing delivery of
kidney-protection strategies on people most likely to benefit, thereby limiting resource use
and costs of unnecessary testing or interventions in those at low risk. However, these
strategies, including biomarker measurement, also increase the complexity of patient care.
Considerations for implementation
The individual components of the KDIGO kidney-protection strategy are part of
modern medical care. However, it has been shown that they are not consistently applied in
routine clinical practice.426 Even in the context of a clinical trial, the adherence to the kidney147

protection strategy in the intervention group is reduced.418 Effective implementation may be
facilitated by multidisciplinary collaboration among surgery, anesthesiology, nephrology,
critical care, nursing, and pharmacy teams. Clear delineation of roles and responsibilities is
important to ensure timely risk identification, consistent application of interventions, and
appropriate monitoring. Incorporation of standardized order sets, checklists, or care bundles
may improve adherence and reduce practice variation. Systematic clinical audits can help
with monitoring adherence to kidney protection care bundles, identify barriers to bedside
application, and facilitate data-driven improvements in patient outcomes. Use of clinical
decision support tools within electronic health records may aid implementation by
automating risk stratification, prompting appropriate interventions, and reducing reliance on
individual healthcare professional recall.

AF
T

Rationale
The implementation of a multicomponent kidney-protection strategy in surgical and
critically ill adults at high risk for AKI is recommended based on a series of RCTs showing
that their application reduced the incidence of moderate or severe AKI without an increased
risk of complications or harm. Multicomponent kidney-protection strategies address the
complex pathophysiology of surgical AKI by combining complementary interventions across
the perioperative period, such as optimization of volume status and hemodynamics,
avoidance or minimization of nephrotoxic exposures, drug stewardship, glycemic control,
and enhanced monitoring of kidney function.2, 4-6

D

R

Kidney stress biomarkers have been used to identify people at high risk who are most
likely to benefit from intervention for inclusion in many of the RCTs. However, their use
requires access to specialized assays and timely laboratory processing. In many low-resource,
rural, or non-tertiary care settings, such infrastructure is unavailable, and turnaround times
may not support real-time decision-making. Excessive reliance on biomarkers in these
settings could therefore delay risk identification or preclude implementation of kidneyprotection strategies altogether.
The Work Group judged that early identification of people at high risk using readily
available clinical information is preferable to delayed or absent risk assessment, particularly
when the recommended interventions are low risk and broadly kidney protective. Use of
clinical risk factors or predictive models enables equitable implementation of
multicomponent kidney-protection strategies across diverse healthcare systems and reduces
the risk of excluding people in resource-limited settings from preventive care.
The strength of this recommendation reflects the consistency of benefit observed with
multicomponent approaches, the biological plausibility of targeting multiple injury pathways,
and the substantial clinical consequences of AKI. Although the overall certainty of evidence
148

is moderate due to limitation in study design and uncertain effects on important clinical
outcomes, the Work Group judged that the anticipated benefits of reducing moderate-tosevere AKI in high-risk adults undergoing surgery outweigh the potential harms, supporting
a Level 1 recommendation.
3.3 Use of diuretics
Recommendation 3.3.1: We suggest use of diuretics in the management of clinically
significant volume overload of children and adults with or at risk of AKI or AKD (2B).

AF
T

This recommendation puts a high value on the available physiological and clinical trial data
that show that diuretics are effective at achieving volume removal and that, in situations
where there is clinically relevant fluid accumulation, diuretics are both logical and
desirable. Despite a theoretical potential kidney-protective benefit with loop diuretics, there
is no evidence at present that diuretics reduce the incidence or severity of AKI, as articulated
in the KDIGO 2012 guideline. If target volume removal can be achieved, they may prevent
the need for RRT.

R

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Diuretics can induce fluid removal in most people unless they have anuric kidney
failure. Potential benefits of an initial diuretic trial include improved fluid balance, relief of
congestion-related symptoms, and avoidance or delay of RRT in selected people who are
diuretic responsive. Side effects of diuretics include electrolyte disorders, metabolic
alkalosis, ototoxicity (particularly with high doses of loop diuretics), and the potential for
volume depletion and hypotension if prescribed without re-evaluation of volume status.

D

A Cochrane review assessed the effects of diuretics on the prevention (53 trials, 8078
participants) and treatment (11 trials, 1793 participants) of AKI.427 For AKI prevention,
diuretic use reduced the application of RRT (RR: 0.63; 95% CI: 0.43–0.91 in 32 studies with
4658 participants) and death (RR: 0.73; 95% CI: 0.59–0.92 in 33 studies with 6447
participants) and may reduce the risk of AKI (RR: 0.75; 95% CI: 0.61–0.92, I2=77% in 38
studies with 5540 participants). When used for treatment of AKI, diuretics made little to no
difference in the use of RRT or death and increased the risk of adverse events including
hypotension (RR: 1.99; 95% CI: 1.16–3.41 in 2 studies with 720 participants) and
arrhythmias (RR: 1.62; 95% CI: 1.12–2.33 in 6 studies with 1011 participants).
A recent pooled analysis of 10 RCTs in critically ill participants showed that
protocolized fluid removal using diuretics compared to usual care after the acute phase of
resuscitation resulted in little to no difference in mortality (RR: 0.90; 95% CI: 0.79–1.02) and
no difference in the risk of developing AKI (RR: 0.78; 95% CI: 0.40–1.53) but the likelihood
149

of receiving RRT was significantly lower with diuretic therapy (RR: 0.72; 95% CI: 0.55–
0.96).428
The use of diuretics for the management of clinically significant volume overload in
children with or at risk for AKI is supported by observational studies. Given the potential
side effects including ototoxicity and nephrocalcinosis, loop diuretics should therefore be
targeted to children with clear evidence of clinically significant volume overload.429-431

AF
T

Certainty of evidence
The evidence supporting this recommendation was addressed by a Cochrane review.427
The authors determined that the certainty of evidence was low for prevention of AKI (due to
methodological concerns and inconsistency across trials), moderate for reduction of need for
RRT and to reduce mortality (both due to methodological concerns), and low to reduce the
need for chronic dialysis (due to being very imprecise), with low to very low certainty of
evidence for serious adverse events. Based on this information, we determined that, overall,
there is moderate certainty of evidence.

R

Values and preferences
This recommendation places a high value on alleviating the clinical consequences of
volume overload, including respiratory compromise, impaired tissue oxygenation, and
discomfort and the need for RRT. Patient preferences are driven by a desire to relieve
symptoms, improve functional status, and reduce the risk of complications from volume
overload, such as pulmonary edema and reduce RRT need since this is an invasive procedure.
An initial trial of diuretics aligns with healthcare professional and patient preferences for a
less invasive approach before escalation to RRT, particularly when there is residual kidney
function and potential for diuretic responsiveness.

D

A lower value was placed on potential risks associated with diuretic therapy, such as
electrolyte abnormalities or transient changes in kidney function, when diuretics are used
judiciously and with appropriate monitoring of volume status.
Resource use and costs
Diuretics are widely available. The cost of diuretic therapy is low, and the resources
associated with such therapy, including the need for electrolyte replacement, are relatively
low. As their administration does not require specialized equipment and can typically be
performed in both acute care and critical care environments, their use results in low
incremental resource utilization. Potential cost savings may result from better management of
volume overload, including reduced need for ventilatory support, shorter ICU or hospital
length of stay, and avoided initiation of RRT.

150

AF
T

Considerations for implementation
Diuretics should be used with close monitoring of volume status, urine output, fluid
balance, BP, and serum electrolytes, with prompt adjustment of therapy to avoid
intravascular volume depletion, hypotension, or electrolyte disturbances. Diuretic choice,
dosing, and route of administration should be individualized according to body weight,
kidney function, prior diuretic exposure, and severity of volume overload. Weight-based
dosing and careful monitoring are particularly important in children. Loop diuretics are most
commonly used and can be administered orally or via the intravenous route. An inadequate
diuretic response should prompt early reassessment of volume status and kidney function and
consideration of combination therapy or alternative strategies, including escalation to RRT
when clinically indicated. The combination of a loop and thiazide diuretic may augment
diuresis and decrease the severity of loop diuretic-associated hypernatremia, which often
requires significant free-water administration through the enteral or intravenous route, which
can worsen volume overload.

R

Rationale
The removal of excess fluid is considered important because volume overload can
contribute to organ dysfunction, including pulmonary dysfunction, increased need for
mechanical ventilation, delayed wound healing, and AKI; if not corrected, fluid overload can
cause patient discomfort and potentially become life-threatening. In both pediatric and adult
populations, greater degrees of positive fluid balance have been consistently associated with
increased severity of AKI and worse clinical outcomes.432-434 Diuretics are effective for the
management of volume overload, which is a key component of supportive care in people
with or at risk of AKI or AKD. In people with residual kidney function, an initial trial of
diuretics may facilitate achievement of a neutral or negative fluid balance and reduce
complications related to congestion.

D

A Cochrane systematic review found that diuretics may reduce the incidence of AKI
and probably reduce the need for RRT.427 However, for the treatment of established AKI,
diuretics did not meaningfully improve major kidney outcomes, including mortality or need
for RRT, and were associated with potential harms such as hypotension. This supports
closely monitored initial use of diuretics as a pragmatic and less invasive approach for
volume management before escalation to RRT when there is potential for diuretic
responsiveness.
This recommendation is supported by strong biological plausibility, consistent
observational data linking volume overload with adverse outcomes, extensive clinical
experience demonstrating the effectiveness of diuretics in relieving volume overload,
moderate certainty of evidence that diuretics may reduce the need for RRT when used in
early stages of AKI management, and other guidelines.428
151

Practice Point 3.3.1: Intermittent boluses, rather than continuous infusions of loop
diuretics, are appropriate as the initial diuretic management strategy in adults with or
at risk of AKI or AKD.
The goal of diuretic use is to remove excess fluid effectively and safely without
causing adverse events or prolonging the consequences of fluid overload. The majority of
studies comparing bolus versus continuous infusion therapy have been performed in volumeoverloaded participants with acute decompensated heart failure and have shown mixed
results. A Cochrane meta-analysis of 7 RCTs concluded that there was little to no difference
(benefit or harm) with continuous diuretic infusions compared to bolus dosing.435

R

AF
T

Bolus dosing allows for rapid assessment of diuretic responsiveness, facilitates
titration based on urine output and clinical response, and minimizes unnecessary prolonged
exposure in people who are unlikely to respond. In the case of loop diuretics, the risk of
ototoxicity is relatively low, though it is highest with high bolus doses, whilst continuous
infusions may reduce peak serum concentrations. However, a continuous infusion requires
the patient to be tethered to an infusion, typically via an infusion pump. Continuous infusions
may be considered in selected people with demonstrated diuretic responsiveness who require
sustained diuresis or in those with refractory volume overload to improve urine output or
natriuresis, provided that close monitoring is ensured. Regardless of dosing strategy, lack of
an adequate response should prompt reassessment of volume status and consideration of
alternative therapies, including RRT when indicated.

D

Table 22 | Escalation pathway for diuretic therapy in AKI-related volume overload in adults
Step
Dose/administration
Monitoring/goal
Assessment Furosemide 1.0 mg/kg (i.v. bolus). Use Goal: >200 ml urine output within 2
1.5mg/kg if patient was previously on
hours. If met, continue scheduled dosing
diuretics.
until target fluid removal achieved.
Escalation
If Step 1 fails, double the dose (e.g.,
Maximize bolus dose before switching to
160–200 mg i.v. bolus) every 6–12
infusion. Max bolus: 200 mg.
hours.
Synergism Add a thiazide-like diuretic (e.g.,
Administer 30–60 minutes before the
metolazone 5–10 mg p.o. or
loop diuretic to block distal sodium
chlorothiazide 500 mg i.v.).
reabsorption.
Intensify
Switch to continuous i.v. infusion.
Titrate up to 20 mg/hr (more effective for
Start at 5-10mg/hr.
maintaining steady-state natriuresis)
Failure
Re-evaluate for RRT.
If net negative balance is not achieved
despite max therapy or if K+/pH are
deranged.
AKI, acute kidney injury; i.v., intravenous; K, potassium; p.o., oral; RRT, renal replacement therapy

152

Recommendation 3.3.2: We recommend initial use of diuretics in preference to
extracorporeal fluid removal for adults at risk of or with AKI or AKD who have
clinically significant volume overload in the absence of another indication for RRT
(1C).
Diuretics and ultrafiltration are established strategies to remove excess fluid but have
different risk-benefit profiles. While there is low certainty evidence of no difference in
mortality, ultrafiltration is invasive, costly, and associated with risks, and, unless other
indications are present, should be reserved for situations when initial attempts to manage
volume overload with diuretics are unsuccessful.

R

AF
T

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Fluid removal can be accomplished by 2 different methods: diuretics to augment fluid
excretion by the kidneys or extracorporeal fluid removal. In both cases, delayed fluid
removal prolongs the harmful effects of fluid overload and excessive fluid removal may lead
to hypotension and worsening organ function, including AKI. The potential risks of either
strategy must be balanced against the potential benefit of fluid removal and improvement of
organ function. Benefits of diuretics include rapid initiation, ease of titration, and the ability
to assess responsiveness over a short time frame with low treatment burden. Extracorporeal
fluid removal is highly effective in achieving fluid removal but carries important risks,
including intradialytic hypotension, myocardial ischemia, arrhythmias, and complications
related to vascular access.

D

A meta-analysis of 9 RCTs comparing extracorporeal fluid removal versus diuretic
therapy showed no difference in mortality and no evidence of benefit or harm regarding the
risk of AKI (RR: 1.07; 95% CI: 0.79–1.45; Supplementary Table S52).436 The majority of
studies comparing these fluid removal strategies have focused on participants with acute
decompensated heart failure with concurrent AKI. A pooled analysis of 4 RCTs conducted
by an expert panel of the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine (ESICM)
demonstrated no difference in mortality (RR: 1.13; 95% CI: 0.08–1.53) between fluid
removal using ultrafiltration or RRT versus usual care, including the use of diuretics. 428
When evaluated, there was no significant difference in ventilator-free days, quality of life or
risk of cognitive dysfunction between these strategies. There was also no significant
difference in mortality in subanalyses of participants with fluid accumulation, respiratory
failure, sepsis, or AKI.
Given the invasive nature of extracorporeal fluid removal compared with diuretics,
the currently available evidence favors diuretic administration for fluid removal in adults at
risk of or with AKI with clinically significant volume overload, provided kidney function is
153

adequate to respond to diuretics, treatment response is closely monitored, and extracorporeal
fluid removal can be initiated promptly when diuretics are ineffective or poorly tolerated.
Certainty of evidence
There is low certainty of evidence that, in adults with AKI and hypervolemia, there is
no difference in mortality between diuretic use and application of RRT.436 However, there is
no trial evidence for AKI-specific outcomes or adverse events. The certainty of evidence was
downgraded for methodological limitations of the trials and some imprecision.

AF
T

Values and preferences
This recommendation acknowledges that, in general, people prefer noninvasive
medical treatments over invasive interventions such as ultrafiltration (with central line
placement and exposure to an extracorporeal circuit), unless there is clear evidence of
benefit. Further, hemodynamic stability and preservation of residual kidney function are also
valued, recognizing that extracorporeal fluid removal may expose people to risks of
hypotension and ischemic complications. Overall, the recommendation reflects the judgment
that most patients and healthcare professionals would prefer an initial, closely monitored trial
of diuretics, with timely escalation to RRT only when clinically indicated and consistent with
patient goals and preferences.

R

Resource use and costs
The use of an extracorporeal circuit for fluid removal is associated with greater
resource use and costs, including the placement of vascular access appropriate for the
extracorporeal circuit and the supplies needed for the extracorporeal circuit, including the
device itself. In low resource settings, equipment for ultrafiltration may be inaccessible.
Where the costs of ultrafiltration and RRT are paid out-of-pocket, use of extracorporeal fluid
removal may put people at risk of rapid impoverishment.

D

Considerations for implementation
Both diuretics and extracorporeal fluid removal devices are well established
therapies. They require good understanding of hemodynamics and fluid physiology and close
monitoring. The necessary education is within the usual teaching in nephrology and critical
care. Education for healthcare professionals should address appropriate use, monitoring, and
reassessment to ensure consistent and safe implementation while allowing flexibility for
individualized clinical judgment. Loop diuretics should be used most often, with attention to
achieving an adequate initial dose to assess responsiveness. Intermittent bolus dosing is
generally appropriate as the initial strategy, with escalation or combination diuretic therapy
considered in selected patients. Identification of diuretic nonresponsiveness is essential. Clear
criteria should be established for escalation to extracorporeal fluid removal, including

154

persistent or worsening volume overload despite adequate diuretic therapy, intolerance to
diuretics, or development of additional indications for RRT.
Rationale
The recommendation of diuretics over extracorporeal fluid removal measures is based
on the lower costs, wider availability, and lower degree of invasiveness. Diuretics are
effective for management of volume overload in adults who retain sufficient residual kidney
function. An initial trial of diuretics may achieve meaningful fluid removal, improve
pulmonary and tissue edema, and restore a more favorable fluid balance without exposing
patients to the risks associated with extracorporeal therapies.

AF
T

Extracorporeal fluid removal is highly effective in achieving fluid removal but is
associated with important risks, including vascular access complications, bleeding, infection,
and intradialytic hypotension, which may further compromise renal perfusion and contribute
to kidney injury progression. In the absence of another clear indication for RRT, early use of
extracorporeal fluid removal may therefore expose people to avoidable harms and increased
treatment burden.

D

R

Direct comparative RCTs evaluating diuretics versus extracorporeal fluid removal for
isolated volume overload in AKI are limited, resulting in low certainty of evidence.
Nevertheless, the recommendation is supported by strong biological plausibility, consistent
observational data linking volume overload to poor outcomes, and extensive clinical
experience demonstrating that many patients can be effectively managed with diuretics alone.
The Work Group judged that, for adults with clinically significant volume overload and no
other indication for RRT, the anticipated benefits of an initial diuretic-based strategy
outweigh the potential harms, provided that the response is closely monitored and escalation
to extracorporeal fluid removal occurs promptly when diuretics are ineffective or poorly
tolerated.
3.4 Glucose control
Practice Point 3.4.1: Insulin therapy targeting a plasma glucose level of 140–180 mg/dl
(7.8–10 mmol/) is acceptable over more aggressive targets in critically ill children and
adults with or at risk of AKI or AKD.
This is a change from the KDIGO 2012 guideline, which recommended a lower target
glucose range of 110–149 mg/dl for prevention and management of AKI. The preponderance
of current evidence is that intensive insulin therapy during acute illness does not improve
survival.435 In addition, no studies have focused on kidney outcomes as the primary outcome
measure for such studies. A patient level meta-analysis of 38 trials including 29,537
participants found that intensive glucose control was not associated with a reduced mortality
155

risk but increased the risk of severe hypoglycemia.437 The risk of hypoglycemia is
particularly high in people receiving RRT. There was no apparent benefit in any subgroup
analyses. Furthermore, intensive glucose control requires frequent measurement of glucose
levels and interferes with rest, in particular at night.

AF
T

A secondary analysis of the Safe Pediatric Euglycemia After Cardiac Surgery
(SPECS) trial investigated the impact of tight glycemic control on cardiac surgery-associated
AKI in infants undergoing congenital heart surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass. 438 The
study analyzed data from 799 children aged 0–36 months at 2 centers, comparing tight
glucose control (target glucose 80–110 mg/dl) with standard glucose management. Cardiac
surgery-associated AKI occurred in 36% of participants, predominantly Stage 2 or 3 (72%).
Tight glucose control had no effect on reducing cardiac surgery-associated AKI or improving
duration of mechanical ventilation, ICU or hospital stay, or mortality.439
3.5 Prevention of cardiac surgery-associated AKI
Recommendation 3.5.1: In adults without advanced CKD having cardiac surgery, we
suggest that prophylactic intravenous amino acid administration can be used to prevent
AKI (2A).

D

R

This recommendation puts a high value on the effect of intravenous amino acids on
prevention of AKI and attenuation of its severity since AKI carries an increased cost of
treatment and is a major risk factor for subsequent CKD and cardiovascular events.
However, there is a lack of evidence for the benefit of amino acid infusion on long-term
kidney function or important patient-centered outcomes. It is also uncertain whether the
effect of amino acids on AKI outcomes is based on hyperfiltration leading to transient
physiological changes in GFR versus prevention of structural kidney damage. Amino acid
administration should be considered as an adjunct to, and not a replacement for, established
perioperative kidney-protective measures such as optimization of hemodynamics, avoidance
of nephrotoxins, and appropriate fluid management.
Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Amino acid infusions have been studied for prevention of AKI in large numbers of
adults receiving cardiac surgery, where they appear to be safe with no adverse drug reactions
reported in comparison to placebo. Amino acids activate kidney functional reserve and
increase kidney plasma blood flow, and in turn, GFR by approximately 40%. This effect may
compensate for the decrease in GFR induced by cardiac surgery, resulting in prevention or
attenuation of severity of AKI.

156

In our meta-analysis of 6 RCTs including 4587 adults undergoing cardiac surgery,
prophylactic administration of intravenous amino acids resulted in a lower incidence of
postoperative AKI (RR: 0.80; 95% CI: 0.68–0.95) and significantly lower risk of Stage 3
AKI (RR: 0.52; 95% CI: 0.35–0.78) but without demonstration of significant difference in
initiation of RRT (Supplementary Table S53).440-444 No adverse drug reactions were reported
across trials.

AF
T

The majority of data comes from the multinational, double-blind Intravenous Amino
Acid Therapy for Kidney Protection in Cardiac Surgery (PROTECTION) trial in 3511 adults
undergoing cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass.443 Adults with CKD G4 or G5
were excluded. Participants were randomized to receive an intravenous infusion of either
balanced amino acids at a dose of 2 g/kg ideal body weight/day or placebo starting at
operating room admission for up to 3 days. Postoperative AKI occurred in 474 participants
(26.9%) in the amino acid group and in 555 participants (31.7%) in the placebo group (RR:
0.85; 95% CI: 0.77–0.94; P=0.002). Stage 3 AKI occurred in 29 participants (1.6%) and 52
participants (3.0%), respectively (RR: 0.56; 95% CI: 0.35–0.87). RRT was used in 24
participants (1.4%) in the amino acid group and in 33 participants (1.9%) in the placebo
group (RR: 0.73; 95% CI: 0.43–1.22). There were no substantial differences between the
groups in other secondary outcomes, including mortality or adverse events.

R

In a secondary analysis with focus on 812 participants with CKD,445 intravenous
amino acids significantly decreased the rate of AKI (43.1% vs. 50.3%; RR: 0.86; 95% CI:
0.74–0.99; p=0.041) with a median percentage increase in eGFR from baseline to
postoperative day 3 of 12.7% versus 6.5% in the control group (p=0.002). The effect of
amino acid infusion was similar across different eGFR-based CKD subgroups (30–39, 40–
49, and 50–59 ml/min per 1.73 m2). Finally, amino acid infusion decreased the occurrence of
Stage 3 AKI (2.7% vs. 5.6%; RR: 0.48; 95% CI: 0.24–0.98; p=0.038).

D

A previous meta-analysis of perioperative use of amino acids assessed additional
outcomes, including duration of mechanical ventilation, as well as ICU and hospital length of
stay and mortality. Fifteen studies (14 RCTs and 1 prospective before-after study) reported at
least one outcome of interest, with 6 studies (including 4084 participants) reporting the
primary outcome.446 AKI occurred in 24.7% of participants receiving amino acids versus
30.1% of controls (RR: 0.66; 95% CI: 0.47–0.94; I2=50%; p=0.02). Moreover, consistent
with these findings, amino acids increased the eGFR. While hospital length of stay was
significantly shorter in participants treated with amino acids (MD: -1.02 days, 95% CI: -1.75
to -0.29, p=0.008), there was no significant difference in ICU length of stay; or mortality in
ICU, hospital, or at longest follow-up.

157

While there is evidence of short-term benefit with regard to AKI prevention based on
KDIGO SCr criteria, there is a lack of evidence for the benefit of amino acid infusion for
longer-term kidney function or clinical outcomes. In the PROTECTION trial, SCr
concentration at 90 and 180 days after surgery were similar between the amino acid and
placebo groups, although over half of participants were missing measurements at these
timepoints. It is uncertain whether the effect of amino acids on AKI outcomes in these trials
is based on hyperfiltration and transient physiological changes in GFR versus real prevention
of kidney damage.

AF
T

Certainty of evidence
There is high certainty of evidence that, in adults undergoing cardiac surgery,
perioperative intravenous amino acids reduce the risk of any stage of AKI and Stage 3 AKI,
but without evidence of a difference in RRT (due to imprecision) or benefits on long-term
kidney function. No adverse reactions were reported across a large number of trials and
participants.440-444

R

Values and preferences
This Level 2 recommendation places a high value on preventing postoperative AKI
following cardiac surgery. Patients and healthcare professionals may prioritize interventions
that reduce the risk of AKI and potential downstream adverse outcomes, even when the
anticipated absolute risk reduction in AKI and length of hospital stay is modest. Further,
prophylactic intravenous amino acid administration is relatively simple and short-term, with
minimal burden to patients. However, this recommendation also acknowledges that no
evidence of benefit of amino acids has been established for the need for RRT or long-term
kidney function. Patients may reasonably differ in their willingness to receive an intervention
with uncertain impact on outcomes they consider most important, especially in the context of
complex cardiac surgery care.

D

Overall, the framing as a suggestion reflects the judgment that some healthcare
professionals and patients, particularly those at high risk of AKI, may value a reduction in
AKI or hospital stay. However, given the lack of demonstrated benefit on RRT, long-term
kidney function, or survival, the Work Group anticipates substantial variability in patient
values and preferences, supporting a Level 2 recommendation emphasizing shared decisionmaking.
Resource use and costs
The costs of intravenous amino acid infusion vary between different regions. There
has not been a health economic evaluation of the resource use and costs of amino acid
therapy in cardiac surgery patients, though in a patient-level meta-analysis, amino acid
infusion was associated with a 1-day reduction in hospital length of stay.446 The Work Group
158

judged that the incremental costs of prophylactic intravenous amino acid administration vary
between healthcare settings and the lack of evidence for benefit on high-cost, patientimportant outcomes limits confidence that this strategy provides good value for money.
Healthcare systems may differ in their decisions to adopt this intervention based on local
costs, priorities, and the availability of alternative kidney-protection strategies.

AF
T

Considerations for implementation
Implementation of amino acid infusion beginning before cardiac surgery and
continuing for 3 days is feasible but requires planning and delivery into operating room
workflows beginning before the start of surgery. Healthcare systems choosing to adopt this
strategy should define clear protocols specifying patient selection, amino acid formulation,
dosing, timing, and duration, consistent with regimens evaluated in clinical trials. Close
collaboration among anesthesiology, surgery, critical care, and pharmacy teams may
facilitate consistent and safe implementation. Use in people with advanced CKD should be
approached with caution, given the limited evaluation in this population.
Rationale
Cardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass is associated with a high incidence of
AKI. By activating kidney functional reserve, amino acid infusion may compensate for the
decrease in GFR associated with cardiac surgery, attenuating the rate of AKI. The strength of
this recommendation was influenced by the uncertain effects on structural kidney injury and
long-term kidney function.

R

Recommendation 3.5.2: We suggest remote ischemic preconditioning for patients at
high risk for AKI undergoing cardiac surgery without propofol anesthesia to prevent
AKI in children (2D) and adults (2B).

D

Remote ischemic preconditioning, triggered by brief episodes of ischemia and reperfusion
before exposure to a potentially ischemic event, has been demonstrated to reduce the
incidence of AKI and use of RRT in people undergoing cardiac surgery. However, this
finding is limited to trials in which participants did not receive propofol anesthesia, which
may attenuate its effect. It should be performed prior to or early during surgery by trained
personnel. Evidence in children is limited, and the certainty of benefit is lower than in adults.

159

AF
T

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Remote ischemic preconditioning is a noninvasive intervention that appears safe, has
a demonstrable effect on clinical outcome, and is inexpensive (Figure 10).

Figure 10 | Principles of remote ischemic preconditioning

However, it should not be applied to people with peripheral vascular disease. The
risks of remote ischemic preconditioning are low, but it may cause discomfort if not done
during anesthesia and may lead to petechial changes in the skin at the site of cuff inflation. It
also requires time during perioperative care.

R

Studies have shown mixed results regarding protection of kidney function. Reasons
for some of the controversial results include differences in patient populations (high-risk vs.
low-risk populations), comorbidities, type of surgery, and remote ischemic preconditioning
protocols. Further, some medications (e.g., propofol, sulfonamide) may mitigate the
protective effects of remote ischemic preconditioning.

D

Meta-analysis of 8 RCTs comparing remote ischemic preconditioning with no remote
ischemic preconditioning in 1003 adults undergoing cardiac surgery under general anesthesia
without propofol showed a significantly lower incidence of postoperative AKI (RR: 0.71;
95% CI: 0.59–0.85) in the remote ischemic preconditioning group (Supplementary Table
S54). Participants receiving remote ischemic preconditioning also had a lower risk of RRT
initiation (RR: 0.50; 95% CI: 0.28–0.89) but there was no difference in mortality or
MAKE90.447-456
Data on the efficacy of remote ischemic preconditioning in children undergoing
cardiac surgery without propofol derived from 1 RCT. The RCT compared remote ischemic
preconditioning versus no remote ischemic preconditioning in 84 children undergoing
cardiac surgery under general anesthesia without propofol and reported a lower incidence of
AKI in those who received remote ischemic preconditioning, though the result did not
achieve statistical significance for AKI or mortality (Supplementary Table S55).457

160

In addition, a 2025 meta-analysis of 6 RCTs involving 1098 pediatric cardiac surgery
patients who either received propofol or not found remote ischemic preconditioning
significantly reduced AKI incidence (OR: 0.38; 95% CI: 0.25–0.60, p<0.00001), representing
a 62% risk reduction.458 This kidney benefit persisted despite moderate heterogeneity among
studies (I²=52%).
Certainty of evidence
There is moderate certainty of evidence that for adults undergoing cardiac surgery
without use of propofol anesthesia, remote ischemic preconditioning reduces the risk of AKI
and RRT initiation, without reported treatment-related adverse events.447-456 The certainty of
evidence was downgraded for some methodological limitations of the included studies.

AF
T

There is very low certainty of evidence that for children undergoing cardiac surgery
without use of propofol anesthesia, remote ischemic preconditioning may reduce the risk of
AKI, but with unclear effect on mortality or adverse events.457 The certainty of evidence was
downgraded for sparse data with imprecise estimates and methodological limitations.

R

Values and preferences
This recommendation places a high value on preventing cardiac surgery-associated
AKI. It places a lower value on the time required to perform remote ischemic
preconditioning, which is noninvasive, usually performed after the patient has been
anesthetized, and not associated with any specific harmful events. The Work Group judged
that many people undergoing cardiac surgery would prefer remote ischemic preconditioning
during anesthesia to prevent AKI as the additional discomfort would be minimal.

D

Resource use and costs
Remote ischemic preconditioning can be performed using a standard BP cuff and
does not require specialized equipment. It can be integrated into routine perioperative
workflows
Avoidance of propofol anesthesia may have implications for anesthetic selection and
healthcare system protocols but is not expected to substantially increase costs. By reducing
the incidence of postoperative AKI, remote ischemic preconditioning may decrease
downstream resource utilization associated with RRT, prolonged hospitalization, and
postoperative complications. Overall, the intervention is expected to be cost neutral or cost
saving in most settings.
Considerations for implementation
Remote ischemic preconditioning should be delivered using a standardized protocol,
typically consisting of repeated cycles of limb ischemia and reperfusion using a BP cuff, and
161

performed prior to or early during anesthesia for cardiac surgery. Coordination between
surgical, anesthesia, and perioperative teams is required to ensure appropriate timing and to
avoid the use of propofol anesthesia which may attenuate the kidney-protective effect of the
intervention.459 Staff should be trained in correct cuff placement, inflation pressures, and
monitoring to minimize local complications. Healthcare system protocols may facilitate
consistent application, particularly in pediatric populations where cuff size and ischemia
duration require adjustment.

AF
T

Rationale
Remote ischemic preconditioning is a noninvasive intervention that induces transient
limb ischemia to activate systemic protective pathways which may reduce ischemia–
reperfusion injury in distant organs, including the kidney. RCTs and meta-analyses in adults
undergoing cardiac surgery have demonstrated a reduction in postoperative AKI when
remote ischemic preconditioning is used in the absence of propofol anesthesia. 459 Evidence in
children is more limited, resulting in lower certainty, but available data suggest potential
benefit without significant safety concerns. Given the low risk, minimal resource
requirements, and potential to reduce AKI, RRT, and its downstream consequences; remote
ischemic preconditioning represents a favorable preventive strategy in people undergoing
cardiac surgery when anesthetic conditions are appropriate.

R

3.6 Hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI
Recommendation 3.6.1: We recommend the use of vasoconstrictor therapy for adults
with hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI (1C).

D

Practice Point 3.6.1: The choice of vasoconstrictor should be based on the clinical care
context and patient condition. Terlipressin or norepinephrine are preferrable therapies;
midodrine with octreotide can be used as an alternative for adults if terlipressin and
norepinephrine are unavailable.
People with hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI typically tolerate RRT more poorly than
people without liver disease due to relative systemic hypotension. Vasoconstrictor therapy
has been shown to improve kidney function. For people with hepatorenal syndromeassociated AKI, improvement in kidney function may avoid RRT prior to liver transplantation
with or without associated kidney transplantation. In people with hepatorenal syndromeassociated AKI who are not candidates for liver transplantation, improvement in kidney
function may avoid RRT. Both norepinephrine and terlipressin can reverse AKI, but
terlipressin has also been shown to reduce the incidence of RRT. However, terlipressin is
associated with a higher incidence of ischemic and other adverse events, including
pulmonary edema. The choice between terlipressin and norepinephrine is guided by local
availability, clinician expertise, monitoring capabilities, and individual patient
162

AF
T

characteristics. Norepinephrine generally requires administration in settings with close
hemodynamic monitoring, such as an ICU, whereas terlipressin may be administered outside
the ICU in selected people. Individualized risk assessment and shared decision-making are
essential when choosing between these treatment alternatives. Since terlipressin is not
accessible in all countries, and treatment with norepinephrine often necessitates ICU
admission, alternative therapies are required for hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI in
case of limited availability of ICU beds, the presence of contraindications to terlipressin
therapy, as well as in countries where terlipressin is not approved for clinical use. The
evidence supporting the efficacy of midodrine and octreotide is limited and generally of low
certainty, and thus midodrine and octreotide should be considered only when terlipressin
and norepinephrine are unavailable or cannot be administered. Healthcare professionals
should recognize that response rates may be lower than with other vasoconstrictor therapies,
and treatment should be reassessed regularly, particularly in people who fail to demonstrate
early improvement in kidney function.

D

R

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
The application of vasoconstrictor therapy in adults with hepatorenal syndromeassociated AKI is associated with improvement of kidney function and reversal of AKI.
Meta-analysis of 12 RCTs comparing terlipressin versus placebo in 1559 adults with
hepatorenal syndrome showed that participants treated with terlipressin had a significantly
higher probability of reversal of hepatorenal syndrome (RR: 2.09; 95% CI: 1.79–2.45;
Supplementary Table S56). Two RCTs included data on use of RRT and showed
significantly lower RRT use in participants receiving terlipressin (RR: 0.77; 95% CI: 0.63–
0.95). Seven studies included data on adverse events showing a significantly higher incidence
in the terlipressin-treated cohort (OR: 2.28; 95% CI: 1.58–3.29), including serious
gastrointestinal, cardiac, and respiratory complications. There was also a substantially greater
proportion of participants receiving terlipressin who required therapy discontinuation but
there was no difference in mortality.
Studies vary in patient selection, terlipressin dosing and escalation, and use of
concomitant therapies, including fluid administration and concomitant use of albumin.252
Given the increased risk of pulmonary edema, close monitoring of volume status during
terlipressin therapy and adjustment of fluid and albumin administration is advised.
Norepinephrine and midodrine (with and without octreotide) are alternative
vasoconstrictors for hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI. Network meta-analysis showed
norepinephrine reverses hepatorenal syndrome better than placebo (RR: 1.86; 95% CI: 1.40–
2.47; Supplementary Table S54) but may not reduce risk of death (RR: 0.95; 95% CI: 0.77–
1.18) with no indication of increase in serious adverse events.460 Midodrine and octreotide
163

may also reverse hepatorenal syndrome better than placebo (RR: 1.52; 95% CI: 0.98–2.35;
Supplementary Table S55), but also may not reduce the risk of death (RR: 1.16; 95% CI:
0.78–1.72), also with no indication of increase in adverse events.460
A meta-analysis of 10 RCTs comparing norepinephrine and terlipressin in adults with
hepatorenal syndrome showed no significant difference in recovery of kidney function (RR:
0.89; 95% CI: 0.74–1.06) or mortality (HR: 1.33; 95% CI: 0.87–2.00) but a significantly
higher incidence of adverse ischemic events with terlipressin (RR: 3.33; 95% CI: 1.47–7.53;
Supplementary Table S57).

AF
T

Terlipressin is increasingly used worldwide. The increased risk of respiratory failure
has led to regulatory warnings against using terlipressin in people with hypoxia and a
recommendation to monitor respiratory status closely (Table 23).461
There are no RCTs comparing midodrine (alone) with placebo in hepatorenal
syndrome-associated AKI. One RCT compared midodrine and octreotide with terlipressin
(Supplementary Table S57). Based on network meta-analyses including various vasopressins,
midodrine and octreotide had a lower incidence of kidney recovery than terlipressin (RR:
0.41; 95% CI: 0.19–0.86). There was no difference in mortality or incidence of serious
adverse events (HR: 1.14; 95% CI: 0.42–3.11; Supplementary Table S59).460

R

Systematic reviews of studies comparing the use midodrine and octreotide to
norepinephrine did not find significant differences in mortality (RR: 1.06; 95% CI: 0.78–
1.44), reversal of hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI (RR: 0.78; 95% CI: 0.56–1.10), or
serious adverse events (RR: 1.49; 95% CI: 0.89–2.50; Supplementary Table S60).460, 462

D

Octreotide is typically administered as a subcutaneous injection, which is associated
with minor discomfort. In some people, midodrine may cause bradycardia, though this is
typically not hemodynamically significant due to the vasoconstrictor effect. Therefore, in
most cases, the potential benefit for hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI reversal exceeds
the risks of harms associated with midodrine and octreotide treatment.

164

AF
T

Table 23 | Standardized vasoactive therapy in hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI
Medication
Mode of
Recommended dose
Duration
administration
Terlipressin
Continuous i.v.
Start at 2 mg/24h. If SCr
Until SCr returns to
infusion
does not decrease by >25%
baseline (<1.5 mg/dl) or
(Preferred to reduce after 48h, increase every 24– for a maximum of 14
side effects)
48h up to a maximum of 12
days. Discontinue if no
mg/24h.
response by Day 4.
i.v. bolus
0.5–1 mg every 4–6 hours.
Same as continuous
(Alternative)
Increased to 2 mg every 4–6 infusion.
hours if SCr does not
decrease significantly.
Noradrenaline
Continuous i.v
0.5–3.0 mg/h titrated to
Until reversal of
infusion
achieve an increase in MAP hepatorenal syndrome or
(Requires CVC)
of at least 10 mm Hg or to
for a maximum of 14
achieve a MAP >65–70 mm days.
Hg.
Midodrine
Oral
7.5–15 mg every 8 hours
Until reversal of
hepatorenal syndrome;
only consider if
+
terlipressin is
contraindicated or
Octreotide
Subcutaneous
100-200 mcg every 8 hrs
transfer to the ICU is not
possible
AKI, acute kidney injury, ICU, intensive care unit; i.v., intravenous; MAP, mean arterial pressure; SCr,
serum creatinine;

D

R

Certainty of evidence
There is moderate certainty of evidence that in adults with hepatorenal syndrome,
terlipressin increases the likelihood of reversal of hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI and
decreases the risk of RRT compared with placebo, although, with a large increased risk of
serious adverse events in the cardiac, respiratory, and gastrointestinal organ systems. 460, 463-467
The certainty of evidence was downgraded for some methodological limitations of the trials.
There is low certainty of evidence that in adults with hepatorenal syndrome,
norepinephrine increases the likelihood of reversal of hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI
compared with placebo, does not affect mortality, and does not increase the risk of serious
adverse events. The certainty of evidence was downgraded for some methodological
limitations of the trials and imprecision.
There is very low certainty of evidence that, in adults with hepatorenal syndrome,
combination therapy of midodrine and octreotide may increase the likelihood of reversal of
hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI compared with placebo but may not affect death or the
risk of serious adverse events.460 The finding is from a network meta-analysis that did not
include any studies that directly compared midodrine plus octreotide to placebo. The
165

certainty of evidence was, thus, downgraded for indirectness, in addition to methodological
limitations of the included studies and imprecision in the effect estimates.
There is low certainty of evidence that in adults with hepatorenal syndrome, there is
no difference in AKI outcomes or death between terlipressin and norepinephrine, but with
high certainty of evidence that terlipressin is more likely to have ischemic adverse events.
The certainty of evidence was downgraded for some methodological limitations of the trials
and imprecision.

AF
T

There is very low certainty of evidence that, in adults with hepatorenal syndrome,
combination therapy of midodrine and octreotide is less likely to reverse hepatorenal
syndrome-associated AKI than terlipressin. The finding is primarily from a network metaanalysis, which was statistically inconsistent with one direction.
There is low certainty of evidence of no difference in effect of midodrine and
octreotide or norepinephrine on reversal of hepatorenal syndrome, death, or serious adverse
events. Certainty of evidence was downgraded for methodological limitations and
imprecision.460, 462

D

R

Values and preferences
The decision to initiate vasoconstrictor therapy requires shared-decision making with
the patient, including a discussion about the potential benefit of avoiding RRT versus the risk
of adverse effects and the potential need for transfer to the ICU. Whilst terlipressin can be
given via a peripheral line or subcutaneously, it is associated with an increased risk of
pulmonary oedema. Administration of norepinephrine often requires a central line and
transfer to an ICU setting. Administration of midodrine and octreotide is relatively simple,
though octreotide is often administered as a subcutaneous injection that may cause transient
discomfort. However, for most patients, this is likely preferable to worsening hepatorenal
syndrome-associated AKI, which may progress to a need for RRT and a high risk of
mortality.
In some healthcare settings, kidney function impacts transplant prioritization for
people who are candidates for liver transplantation, and an improvement in kidney function
may portend longer waiting times for transplantation. For people who are not candidates for
liver transplantation due to other comorbidities, the use of such therapies is likely to be lifeprolonging.
This recommendation places a high value on preserving access to potentially
beneficial therapy for hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI in settings where first-line
vasoconstrictors are unavailable or cannot be administered. The recommendation also
166

reflects the value placed on flexibility and equity across diverse health care settings.
Midodrine and octreotide are widely available and can be administered outside of ICUs,
which may align with patient preferences to avoid higher levels of care. Given the very low
certainty of evidence, the Work Group judged that most well-informed patients would accept
the potential for modest or uncertain benefit in exchange for the possibility of kidney
function improvement when no better-supported alternatives are available. Patients will
likely prefer to receive either of these therapies, since progression of hepatorenal syndromeassociated AKI can lead to kidney failure, the need for RRT, other adverse outcomes, and
death.

AF
T

Resource use and costs
If a patient can avoid RRT for hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI, this may be
associated with decreased resource use and costs, though an economic analysis has not been
published. The cost of terlipressin is higher than the cost of norepinephrine. The use of
norepinephrine will typically require transfer to the ICU and placement of a central venous
cannula or peripherally inserted central catheter, both of which are associated with resource
use and costs.
Midodrine and octreotide are relatively inexpensive and more readily accessible than
terlipressin or norepinephrine and require fewer resources for administration. These
properties may reduce direct medication costs and the need for specialized staffing or
facilities.

R

However, these potential cost savings may be offset by lower efficacy and uncertain
clinical benefit, which could result in prolonged hospitalization, delayed kidney recovery, or
increased need for RRT and escalation of care. The low certainty of evidence limits
confidence in the cost-effectiveness of this regimen.

D

Considerations for implementation
The intermittent administration of terlipressin by peripheral line is logistically
straightforward. Terlipressin can be administered in select non-ICU settings depending on
institutional protocols and monitoring capacity. The administration of norepinephrine
typically requires a central line or peripherally inserted central catheter placement for longerterm infusion and is typically administered in an ICU setting with continuous intravenous
infusion and frequent BP and laboratory monitoring.
Terlipressin and norepinephrine require careful hemodynamic monitoring to avoid
ischemic complications, arrhythmias, or excessive BP elevation. Healthcare professionals
should assess contraindications, including significant cardiovascular disease, severe
peripheral vascular disease, or uncontrolled hypertension. Dosing should be individualized,
167

with early assessment of treatment response through changes in kidney function, urine
output, and hemodynamics. Therapy should be adjusted or discontinued if adverse events
occur or if no response is observed. In children, evidence is limited, and therapy should be
guided by expert consultation and careful weight-based dosing.

AF
T

Midodrine and octreotide do not require intravenous access for administration and
can more readily be administered outside of the hospital setting. They should be implemented
only as alternative therapy in people with hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI when
terlipressin and norepinephrine are unavailable or cannot be administered. This regimen is
typically administered in non–ICU settings and requires coordinated oral and subcutaneous
dosing, with careful titration of midodrine to achieve an increase in MAP. Blood pressure,
kidney function, urine output, and serum electrolytes should be monitored closely, and
healthcare professionals should remain vigilant for adverse effects such as bradycardia,
hypertension, gastrointestinal intolerance, or ischemic complications.
Use of vasoconstrictor therapy should be integrated into a broader strategy for
hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI management, including albumin administration and
timely evaluation for liver transplantation. Criteria for assessing a treatment response and for
discontinuation or escalation of therapy should be established at the outset. Early
consultation with hepatology and nephrology services may support appropriate patient
selection and determination of suitability for alternative therapies, including RRT, and/or
evaluation for liver transplantation.

D

R

Rationale
The rationale for vasoconstrictor use for hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI is
based on the ability to reverse splanchnic vasodilatation associated with advanced liver
disease or cirrhosis, thereby improving renal perfusion and GFR. The ability to attenuate the
risks associated with hepatorenal syndrome and to preserve and improve kidney function is
important to prognosis and patient management, including potentially preventing the need for
RRT.
Terlipressin, a vasopressin analog with predominant splanchnic vasoconstrictive
effects, and norepinephrine, a potent systemic vasoconstrictor, have shown broadly
comparable efficacy in improving kidney outcomes in appropriately selected adults.
Although evidence for mortality benefit is inconsistent, improvement in kidney function is
clinically meaningful, particularly as a bridge to liver transplantation or recovery from acute
decompensation. The overall certainty of evidence in adults is low, reflecting variability in
study design, outcome definitions, and adverse event reporting.

168

When first-line agents such as terlipressin or norepinephrine are unavailable,
midodrine, in combination with octreotide, is an alternative. Small trials and observational
data suggest that this combination may improve kidney function in some people with
hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI, although the response rates are generally lower and
less consistent than with terlipressin or norepinephrine. Evidence is limited by small sample
sizes, heterogeneous patient populations, and variable outcome definitions, resulting in very
low certainty of evidence.

AF
T

The recommendation reflects a balance between potential benefits in reversing
abnormal kidney function and potential adverse effects, including risks of vasoconstrictor
therapy. The choice of agent should therefore be individualized based on clinical care
context, patient condition, and available resources, recognizing that timely treatment of
hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI is a priority despite remaining uncertainties in the
evidence base.
3.7 Tumor lysis syndrome-associated AKI
Practice Point 3.7.1: Volume expansion without urinary alkalinization using
intravenous crystalloids should be done in children and adults with or at risk of tumor
lysis syndrome.

D

R

Tumor lysis syndrome can occur spontaneously or in the setting of chemotherapy,
typically in the context of leukemias/lymphomas and more rarely in solid cancers with
relatively high cell turnover rates or massive cell burden. Uric acid from lysed tumor cells
contributes to the pathogenesis of AKI due to precipitation in kidney tubules. Precipitation of
calcium phosphate in renal tubules as a result of hyperphosphatemia may also be
contributory. Hyperuricemia may also lead to decreased kidney blood flow through
vasoconstriction and impaired autoregulation.468 Hyperkalemia and metabolic acidosis from
lysed cells can be life-threatening and necessitate urgent RRT. A number of classifications
have been proposed to risk-stratify cancers into low, intermediate, and high risk for tumor
lysis syndrome.469, 470
Consequently, efforts to prevent AKI are important for children with diseases or
treatments carrying intermediate or high risks of tumor lysis syndrome. A predominant focus
is on mitigating uric acid precipitation in kidney tubules. This can be aided by volume
expansion, with the goal of increasing urine flow to at least 100 ml/hour in adults and
preventing tubular obstruction, along with measures to decrease systemic uric acid
concentrations. Crystalloids are recommended for volume expansion, although there is lack
of evidence to support the selection of one fluid over another in this context. There is no
evidence that alkalinization of urine reduces the risk of tumor lysis syndrome, but it may
increase the development of calcium/phosphate crystals.
169

Recommendation 3.7.1: In children and adults with or at high risk of tumor lysis
syndrome, we recommend rasburicase over allopurinol or febuxostat, if not
contraindicated due to glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency (1B).
Practice Point 3.7.2: In children and adults at lower risk of tumor lysis syndrome, or
when rasburicase is contraindicated or inaccessible, xanthine oxidase inhibitors may be
used.

AF
T

Rasburicase is a recombinant form of urate oxidase, which metabolizes uric acid to the much
more soluble allantoin. In contrast, allopurinol and febuxostat inhibit xanthine oxidase to
prevent the formation of uric acid from hypoxanthine and xanthine. Consequently,
allopurinol and febuxostat are not effective when uric acid is already present since these
agents do not lower uric acid concentration. Rasburicase may prevent the need for RRT in
people at high risk and has the greatest benefit for people with high baseline uric acid levels,
rapidly proliferative or highly chemosensitive malignancies, high tumor burden, or impaired
kidney function at presentation. Screening for glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)
deficiency is recommended before administration when feasible, as rasburicase is
contraindicated in people with G6PD deficiency. In people at lower risk of tumor lysis
syndrome, or when rasburicase is contraindicated or unavailable, xanthine oxidase
inhibitors (allopurinol or febuxostat) may be used. Cost, availability, and institutional
protocols may influence agent availability and selection.

D

R

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
The majority of evidence for prophylaxis and treatment of tumor lysis syndrome
comes from studies in children, since they are more likely to have cancers that put them at
high risk of tumor lysis syndrome. Rasburicase is a recombinant urate oxidase that
enzymatically converts uric acid to allantoin, a highly soluble metabolite readily excreted by
the kidney. This mechanism allows rapid and profound reduction in serum uric acid levels,
including clearance of preexisting hyperuricemia. The side effect profile of rasburicase
includes disseminated intravascular coagulopathy and severe allergies. People with G6PD
deficiency are at risk of methemoglobinemia. In contrast, allopurinol and febuxostat inhibit
xanthine oxidase and reduce the formation of new uric acid but do not eliminate circulating
uric acid already present at the time of treatment initiation. Their onset of action is slower,
and they may lead to accumulation of xanthine and hypoxanthine.
Meta-analysis of 4 RCTs comparing rasburicase versus allopurinol in children with
tumor lysis syndrome showed that those treated with rasburicase had a significantly lower
risk of needing RRT (RR: 0.27; 95% CI: 0.10–0.76) and a significantly lower risk of tumor
170

lysis syndrome related mortality (RR: 0.05; 95% CI: 0.0–0.90) but also a significantly higher
risk of serious adverse events (RR: 6.20; 95% CI: 1.14–33.65), which included disseminated
intravascular coagulopathy and methemoglobinemia (Supplementary Table S61).471-475
In people with G6PD deficiency, the generation of hydrogen peroxide as part of the
metabolism of uric acid by rasburicase can cause severe hemolytic anemia and
methemoglobinemia. Thus, screening for G6PD deficiency is recommended in newborns and
individuals of African, Asian, Mediterranean, or Middle Eastern descent before
administration when feasible. Allergic reactions are also relatively common.

AF
T

The evidence for prevention and management of tumor lysis syndrome in adults is
limited. The challenge with extrapolating the effects of these agents on adults is that adult
populations are generally at lower risk of life-threatening tumor lysis syndrome. Rasburicase
is often reserved for administration in adults only when uric acid levels exceed a
predetermined threshold because of higher cost and risks of adverse reactions.

R

In people at low risk of tumor lysis syndrome, or when rasburicase is contraindicated
or unavailable, xanthine oxidase inhibitors may be used. Allopurinol can be considered in
those with low or intermediate risk of tumor lysis syndrome. Prescribers should be aware of
the high incidence of skin reactions with allopurinol. Screening for allopurinol
hypersensitivity with the HLA-B*58:01 genetic allele should be considered before initiating
therapy, when possible, particularly for people of Han Chinese, Thai, or Korean descent.
Hypersensitivity reactions, including Stevens-Johnson syndrome, are also more common
with allopurinol. Finally, allopurinol has a number of important drug-drug interactions that
must be considered during its administration.

D

An alternative xanthine oxidase inhibitor with fewer interactions is febuxostat.
However, there have been reports of hypersensitivity reactions, and an increased risk of
mortality from major cardiovascular events with febuxostat. The safety and efficacy of
febuxostat in children has not been established.
Certainty of evidence
There is moderate certainty of evidence that, in children with tumor lysis syndrome,
rasburicase greatly reduces the risk of death due to tumor lysis syndrome and the risk of AKI
requiring RRT compared with allopurinol, but with no evidence of an effect on overall
mortality.471-475 However, rasburicase increases the risk of serious adverse events compared
with allopurinol. The certainty of evidence was downgraded for very serious methodological
limitations across trials but was upgraded due to the very large effect sizes for most
outcomes. The certainty of evidence for use of rasburicase in adults with tumor lysis

171

syndrome was downgraded to low due to indirectness, since there were no eligible trials in
adults.
Values and preferences
This recommendation places a high value on the prevention of life-threatening
complications of tumor lysis syndrome, including AKI requiring RRT, but also cardiac
arrhythmias, seizures, and death, through rapid and effective reduction of serum uric acid
levels. The Work Group judged that patients and healthcare professionals would generally
prioritize immediate and reliable uric acid control in those at high risk or with tumor lysis
syndrome over considerations of higher acquisition cost and the need for parenteral
administration associated with rasburicase.

AF
T

However, this recommendation also places a high value on safety in people with
G6PD deficiency, in whom rasburicase may cause severe hemolysis and
methemoglobinemia. In settings where G6PD status is unknown and testing is not readily
available; healthcare professionals and patients may choose alternative urate-lowering
strategies until deficiency is excluded.

R

Resource use and costs
Cost, availability, and healthcare system protocols may influence agent selection and
dosing strategies. The Work Group recognized that the cost of rasburicase is greater than that
of allopurinol or feboxustat on a per-dose or per-treatment-course basis. Further, rasburicase
requires intravenous administration and appropriate laboratory handling of blood samples on
ice for uric acid measurement, which may increase direct and indirect healthcare costs
compared with orally administered alternatives.

D

The prevention of AKI requiring RRT with its associated costs may make use of
rasburicase cost-effective. The Work Group recognized that rasburicase is substantially more
expensive than xanthine oxidase inhibitors (allopurinol and febuxostat) on a per-dose and
per-treatment-course basis. However, a cost effectiveness analysis from the U.S. suggested
that rasburicase was associated with significantly shorter ICU and overall hospital stays and
lower total inpatient costs than allopurinol for people with tumor lysis syndrome.476 Costeffectiveness is likely to vary according to baseline tumor lysis syndrome risk, local drug
pricing, dosing strategies, and healthcare system structure. In people at low risk of tumor
lysis syndrome, the incremental benefit of rasburicase over allopurinol or febuxostat is likely
small, and the higher cost may not be justified. In contrast, in people at high risk of tumor
lysis syndrome or with marked hyperuricemia, rasburicase is more likely to be cost-effective
due to reduction in downstream complications.

172

Availability of rasburicase may be limited in some regions, and access to G6PD
testing may further influence resource use. In resource-constrained settings, cost and access
considerations may necessitate prioritization of rasburicase for those at highest risk, with
allopurinol or febuxostat used in lower-risk patients.

AF
T

Considerations for implementation
Successful implementation of this recommendation requires systematic risk
stratification for tumor lysis syndrome in children and adults with malignancy, ideally prior
to initiation of cytotoxic therapies. Institutions should establish standardized protocols to
identify people at intermediate and high risk of tumor lysis syndrome. Early recognition is
essential to allow timely administration of rasburicase before or at the onset of biochemical
abnormalities.
Rasburicase should not be administered to people with G6PD deficiency due to the
risk of severe hemolysis and methemoglobinemia. Screening for G6PD deficiency should be
performed in populations with higher prevalence, when feasible, and urgently when clinical
suspicion exists. In situations where G6PD status is unknown and testing is not immediately
available, healthcare professionals should carefully weigh risks and benefits, particularly in
people at lower risk.

R

Healthcare systems should ensure availability of rasburicase in centers treating people
at high risk of tumor lysis syndrome. Institutional protocols may include predefined dosing to
optimize efficacy and cost-effectiveness. Clear guidance regarding repeat dosing criteria
based on serial uric acid measurements and clinical response should be established.

D

Appropriate laboratory handling of blood samples is critical when monitoring uric
acid levels in people receiving rasburicase, as ex vivo uric acid degradation can lead to falsely
low measurements. Blood samples should be collected in prechilled tubes, transported on ice,
and analyzed promptly according to manufacturer and laboratory guidance.
Rasburicase should be integrated into a comprehensive tumor lysis syndrome
prevention and management strategy that includes intravenous hydration, careful monitoring
of electrolytes and kidney function, and prompt management of associated electrolytes
abnormalities including hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia, and hypocalcemia.
Interdisciplinary coordination among oncology, nephrology, pharmacy, and laboratory
services is essential.
Rationale
The recommendation to use rasburicase in children and adults at risk or with tumor
lysis syndrome is based on the effectiveness at preventing the need for RRT but close
173

monitoring for serious adverse effects is needed. Uric acid plays a central role in the
pathogenesis of tumor lysis syndrome-associated AKI through intratubular crystal
precipitation, tubular obstruction, and renal vasoconstriction. The risk and severity of AKI
correlate with the magnitude and rapidity of uric acid elevation. Accordingly, prompt, and
effective urate control is a cornerstone of tumor lysis syndrome prevention and management.
RCTs and comparative studies in both pediatric and adult populations with
hematologic malignancies consistently demonstrate that rasburicase lowers uric acid more
rapidly and more completely than allopurinol. Evidence also supports reduced rates of
laboratory tumor lysis syndrome and need for RRT with rasburicase in high-risk populations.

AF
T

In people at low or intermediate risk of tumor lysis syndrome, the absolute risk of
severe hyperuricemia and AKI is lower. In this setting, prophylactic reduction of uric acid
production with allopurinol or febuxostat is generally sufficient, and the incremental benefit
of rasburicase is likely small.
The recommendation therefore reflects a risk-adapted approach. In children and
adults at high risk of tumor lysis syndrome, or with established laboratory or clinical tumor
lysis syndrome, the benefits of rapid and reliable urate reduction with rasburicase outweigh
considerations related to cost and intravenous administration. In contrast, for those at low or
intermediate risk, xanthine oxidase inhibitors represent reasonable and effective alternatives
for prevention.

R

3.8 Rhabdomyolysis- and hemolysis-associated AKI
Practice Point 3.8.1: Use intravenous crystalloids for volume expansion in children and
adults at risk of or with heme pigment nephropathy due to rhabdomyolysis or
hemolysis.

D

Myoglobin and hemoglobin are endogenous nephrotoxic substances that can
precipitate in kidney tubules and cause acute tubular injury in the setting of rhabdomyolysis
and intravascular hemolysis, respectively. People with rhabdomyolysis and hemolysis should
be monitored closely for the development of hyperkalemia or metabolic acidosis that also
accompany muscle and breakdown of red blood cells and may increase the risk of requiring
RRT. There are no specific pharmacotherapies to enhance metabolism of myoglobin or
hemoglobin. The mainstay of therapy is volume expansion to prevent precipitation in kidney
tubules, with close monitoring for fluid overload, which may develop rapidly if patients
become oliguric. There is limited data to support the selection of one crystalloid fluid over
another in this setting.

174

In people with rhabdomyolysis, the use of isotonic bicarbonate solutions has been
proposed to increase the solubility of myoglobin but the limited data do not support this
practice.477, 478 A strategy to augment urine output using mannitol or loop diuretics is not
advised.
3.9 Nutritional intervention in AKI
Practice Point 3.9.1: Nutrition should be provided preferentially via the enteral route in
children and adults at risk of or with AKI or AKD.

AF
T

At present, there is limited data to guide the provision of nutritional support in adults
with or at risk of AKI or AKD.479 Many nutrition guidelines are largely opinion based.
Despite these limitations, it is clear that enteral nutrition is the preferred form of nutritional
support for hospitalized children and adults, with provision via a feeding tube if oral feeding
is not possible. Enteral nutrition is thought to decrease gut atrophy and maintain gut integrity,
which decreases bacterial and endotoxin translocation.
AKI is a major risk factor for gastrointestinal bleeding, and enteral nutrition is
thought to reduce the risk of stress ulcers and consequently gastrointestinal bleeding.
Although the enteral route is preferred, more recent clinical trials (Enteral versus parenteral
early nutrition in ventilated adults with shock [NUTRIREA-2]) suggest that the risks of
parenteral nutrition (e.g., infection) are often overestimated, so if the enteral route cannot be
used or enteral nutrition is not tolerated, parenteral nutrition is preferable to no nutrition.480

R

Practice Point 3.9.2: Avoid restriction of protein intake with the aim of preventing or
delaying initiation of RRT in children and adults with AKI or AKD.

D

Protein hypercatabolism, driven by inflammation, stress and acidosis, is common
among critically ill children and adults. Those with AKI are at high risk of malnutrition but
the optimal amount of protein supplementation is unknown. Nutritional management should
aim to supply sufficient protein to maintain metabolic balance. There is little evidence that
hypercatabolism can be overcome simply by increasing protein intake.
Restricting protein can exacerbate muscle wasting and malnutrition, leading to poor
outcomes. Studies show that protein intake does not delay kidney recovery but rather
supports growth and healing.481 Hence, nutritional protein administration should not be
restricted as a means to attenuate the rise in blood urea nitrogen associated with declining
GFR.
Children with AKI are at high risk of protein-energy malnutrition, particularly in ICU
settings, where nutritional deficits can weaken immune function and prolong
175

hospitalization.482 Guidelines from the Pediatric Renal Nutrition Taskforce and the ADQI
recommend age-appropriate protein and caloric intake rather than generalized restrictions,
ensuring that children receive sufficient nutrition to prevent deficits and support recovery. 483
Practice Point 3.9.3: Excessive protein intake should be avoided in adults with AKI or
AKD.

AF
T

Given the association of protein-calorie malnutrition with adverse outcomes in
critically ill adults, there has been significant interest in protein supplementation. A large,
pragmatic RCT compared the impact of high protein intake (≥2.2 g/kg/day) versus usual
protein intake (≤1.2 g/kg/day) in critically ill adults on mechanical ventilation.484 There was
no difference in the proportion of participants discharged alive by day 60 (46.1% in the high
protein arm vs. 50.2% in the usual protein arm, p=0.27). However, participants with AKI
who were randomized to high protein intake had a higher mortality and longer time to
hospital discharge.
In a post hoc analysis of the Nephro-Protective trial, participants with normal baseline
kidney function had lower mortality with amino acid supplementation to achieve a total
protein intake of 2 g/kg/day, whereas those with abnormal kidney function at study entry did
not have harm from amino acid supplementation, but also had no benefit.485

R

These trials suggest that excessive protein intake should be avoided in adults with
AKI or AKD. Although protein and amino acid losses increase with continuous renal
replacement therapy (CRRT) and peritoneal dialysis (PD), the extent depends on the dialysis
prescription. It is also unclear how protein intake should be adjusted.

D

Practice Point 3.9.4: Caloric targets do not need to be changed due to AKI or AKD in
children or adults, unless they are receiving RRT.
Adequate nutritional support is important to support recovery from critical illness.
Although many diseases associated with AKI or AKD (e.g., sepsis) will increase metabolic
demand and catabolism, metabolic requirements should take into consideration the disease
processes associated with AKI or AKD. Caloric targets do not need to be restricted in the
context of AKI or AKD. When feasible, indirect calorimetry should be considered to
measure energy expenditure and metabolic rates. Furthermore, to avoid overfeeding, calories
provided from RRT fluids and citrate should be incorporated into caloric targets for children
and adults receiving RRT.

176

Practice Point 3.9.5: Regular review and supplementation of water-soluble vitamins and
micronutrients should be considered in children and adults receiving continuous RRT
(CRRT).

AF
T

CRRT is associated with increased loss of water soluble vitamins (B complex
vitamins and vitamin C) and micronutrients in the effluent fluid.486 In a scoping review that
analyzed 35 publications with focus on micronutrient loss during RRT, carnitine, copper, and
selenium along with vitamins B1 and C were identified as micronutrients where
deficiency/loss was commonly observed.487 Because of variability in CRRT modality, dose,
membrane characteristics, duration of therapy, nutritional intake, and patient-specific factors,
the risk and magnitude of micronutrient losses are heterogeneous. Routine supplementation
with standard multivitamin preparations may not fully compensate for ongoing losses in
people receiving prolonged or high-effluent-dose CRRT, while indiscriminate high-dose
supplementation without monitoring may risk accumulation of certain trace elements.
Monitoring strategies should be individualized based on duration and intensity of
CRRT, nutritional status, and clinical course. Measurement of selected micronutrients (e.g.,
thiamine, vitamin C, selenium, zinc) may be considered in people receiving prolonged
CRRT, those with limited nutritional intake, or when clinical features raise suspicion of
deficiency.

R

In settings where laboratory measurement is not readily available, empiric
supplementation with water-soluble vitamins at doses exceeding standard daily requirements
may be reasonable, particularly for thiamine. However, whether routine supplementation is
beneficial has not been investigated in an RCT.

D

3.10 AKI in pregnancy
Practice Point 3.10.1: Pregnant women with AKI or AKD require specific treatments,
including consideration of early delivery.
AKI during pregnancy and following childbirth is an important obstetric
complication, with distinct etiologies shaped by the interplay of maternal physiology and
pregnancy-specific pathologies. Globally, pregnancy-related AKI affects approximately 2%
of pregnancies. with incidences as low as 0.08%–0.12% in high income countries.488
However, rates remain 20–100-fold higher in low- and middle-resource settings.489 In the
U.S., pregnancy-related AKI incidence tripled between 2006 and 2015, fueled by rising
maternal age and comorbidities, including diabetes and hypertension.490 Racial inequities
persist, with Black and Native American women facing 52% and 45% higher risks,
respectively, compared to White women.

177

The causes of AKI in pregnancy may be due to pregnancy specific disorders,
including preeclampsia, hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelets (HELLP)
syndrome, acute fatty liver of pregnancy, thrombotic microangiopathies, severe hemorrhage,
sepsis, and factors independent of pregnancy. These conditions may progress rapidly and are
associated with substantial maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality. Identifying the
underlying etiology is important to guide management, including consideration of early
delivery.

AF
T

Management of AKI or AKD in pregnancy differs from nonpregnant populations in
several important respects.491 Maternal stabilization must occur concurrently with continuous
assessment of fetal well-being. Volume management requires careful attention to the altered
physiologic state of pregnancy and the risk of pulmonary edema, particularly in
preeclampsia. Blood pressure targets may differ, and medications must be selected with
consideration of fetal safety. Nephrotoxic agents and drugs contraindicated in pregnancy
should be avoided.

R

In severe preeclampsia, HELLP syndrome, or acute fatty liver of pregnancy, maternal
abnormal kidney function may improve only after delivery and delivery of the fetus and
placenta represents definitive therapy. Similarly, persistent maternal deterioration (e.g.,
worsening kidney function, refractory hypertension, pulmonary edema, or progressive
thrombocytopenia) or evidence of fetal compromise may necessitate early delivery,
balancing gestational age, and neonatal risks against maternal safety. The timing of delivery
should be individualized and determined collaboratively by obstetrics, maternal–fetal
medicine, nephrology, neonatology, and critical care teams.492, 493

D

RRT is required in 30% of women with pregnancy-related AKI for maternal or fetal
indications. When indicated, RRT should not be delayed due to pregnancy. Intensified
dialysis regimens may be required to optimize maternal metabolic control and improve fetal
outcomes. Anticoagulation strategies and modality selection should consider bleeding risk,
hemodynamic stability, and gestational age.
3.11 Environmental and tropical AKI
Practice Point 3.11.1: For children and adults presenting with AKD or AKI in tropical
and subtropical regions, evaluate for region-specific infectious and environmental
causes and initiate early disease-specific therapy in addition to standard supportive
management of AKI.
Given the diverse etiologies of tropical AKI, including infectious and environmental
causes (e.g., malaria, leptospirosis, dengue, scrub typhus, envenomation, hemolysis,
rhabdomyolysis, and diarrheal illness), early recognition through clinical suspicion and
178

targeted diagnostic tests, prompt kidney protective measures and use of appropriate infectionspecific therapy, antivenom and management of hemolysis/rhabdomyolysis and timely
initiation of RRT are critical elements of management of AKI in tropical and subtropical
regions. Prevention also relies on improving public health measures (e.g., safe water,
sanitation, vector control), regulation of traditional remedies, and expanding access to
effective medical care, especially in resource-limited settings.

AF
T

Tropical infections
AKI developing in the setting of locally prevalent infections is a significant and
distinct clinical challenge in tropical regions.494 Infections account for 40%–44% of AKI
cases in tropical low- and middle-resource settings.495 The tropical climate, characterized by
high temperatures and humidity, favors the proliferation of pathogens (e.g., Plasmodium and
Leptospira sp, spirochetes, dengue virus, and waterborne bacteria) and vectors (e.g.,
mosquitoes, mites, etc.) responsible for a wide array of infections that can precipitate AKI.
Socioeconomic and public health challenges, such as poor sanitation, limited access to clean
water, and under-resourced healthcare systems, further amplify the risk and burden of
infection-associated AKI.494, 496, 497 Tropical infection-associated AKI is mostly communityacquired and more frequently affects younger, previously healthy people.

D

R

Specific tropical infections associated with AKI include malaria, leptospirosis,
dengue and other viral hemorrhagic fevers, scrub typhus, and yellow fever, human
immunodeficiency virus infection and diarrheal diseases (Table 24).494, 496, 497 Making an
accurate diagnosis of the specific tropical infection causing AKI is critical for ensuring
effective management but is challenging due to overlapping clinical features such as fever,
jaundice, and oliguria, and limited access to laboratory diagnostics in resource-limited
settings.498 Reliance on traditional healers and/or delayed presentation to hospitals may
exacerbate the problem, often resulting in people arriving with established and severe AKI.

179

Table 24 | Tropical infections causing AKI
World region where
Infection
prevalent
Malaria
Southeast Asia, Central
(Plasmodium
America, Africa
falciparum, vivax)
South Asia, Latin America

Dengue

Tropical and subtropical
regions worldwide

Scrub typhus

South Asia

Enteric fever
(Typhoid)

Tropical regions

Hantavirus

Tropical regions

HIV-associated AKI

Fever, jaundice, myalgia, conjunctival
suffusion, thrombocytopenia
Fever, hemorrhagic manifestations,
thrombocytopenia, myalgia, vomiting
Fever, maculopapular rash, eschar,
thrombocytopenia

ATN, hemoglobinuria-induced injury,
cytoadherence causing microvascular
obstruction
Direct tubular invasion, interstitial nephritis,
volume depletion, rhabdomyolysis
Hemodynamic instability, rhabdomyolysis,
immune complex deposition, ATN
Direct tubular invasion, interstitial nephritis,
vasculitis

Fever, abdominal pain, diarrhea

Sepsis-induced ATN, volume depletion

Fever, chills, splenomegaly, jaundice,
hemolysis

Tropical regions with high
HIV prevalence
Tropical regions
Tropical regions

Fever, severe respiratory symptoms,
ARDS
Variable, often with opportunistic
infections
Fever, rash, eschar
Fever, splenomegaly

Tropical regions

Fever, diarrhea, dehydration

Prerenal AKI due to volume depletion, sepsis

Tropical regions of Africa
and South America

Fever, jaundice, hemorrhage, multiorgan failure

ATN, AIN, vascular thrombosis,
hemorrhagic lesions

D
R

Rickettsiosis
Brucellosis
Acute diarrheal
illnesses
Yellow fever

Mechanism of AKI

AF
T

Leptospirosis

Common clinical presentations

ATN, capillary leak syndrome
Direct viral injury, drug nephrotoxicity,
immune complex glomerulonephritis
Vasculitis, interstitial nephritis
Immune complex glomerulonephritis, sepsis

Viral hemorrhagic
fevers (e.g., Ebola,
ATN, capillary leak syndrome, volume
Africa, Asia, parts of Europe Fever, hemorrhage, shock, multiMarburg, Lassa,
depletion, rhabdomyolysis, immune(Crimean-Congo)
organ failure
Crimean-Congo
mediated injury
hemorrhagic fever)
AIN, acute interstitial nephritis; AKI, acute kidney injury; ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; ATN, acute tubular necrosis; HIV, human
immunodeficiency virus.

180

Tropical infection-related AKI has a mortality rate of 12%–30%, depending on the
infection and access to care. Survivors often face long-term consequences, including chronic
kidney disease.499
Management is complicated by the scarcity of RRT facilities, especially in rural
areas. Hemodialysis, the standard treatment for severe AKI, is often unavailable or
unaffordable, making peritoneal dialysis a more feasible alternative in many tropical settings.
Prompt treatment of the underlying infection is crucial: antimalarials for malaria, antibiotics
for leptospirosis, and supportive care, including fluid management for dengue and diarrheal
diseases.

AF
T

Practice Point 3.11.2: For children and adults presenting with AKD or AKI in regions
where traditional medicines and toxic chemicals are used, include AKI due to toxins in
the differential diagnosis.

R

AKI caused by plant and industrial toxins represents a significant health issue,
particularly in regions where traditional medicine is integral to healthcare and the availability
and use of chemicals (e.g., pesticides) is often unregulated.500 Epidemiological studies
indicate that 35% of AKI cases in some developing countries are linked to plant-derived
remedies. A large proportion of the rural populations in Asia, Africa, and Latin America rely
on traditional therapies and are disproportionately affected. The WHO estimates that 80% of
the population of Asian and some African countries presently use herbal medicine for some
aspect of primary healthcare. In developing countries like India, 65% of rural communities
still use a traditional form of medicine to fulfill their primary healthcare needs
(https://tinyurl.com/3pnkfcbc).

D

Consumption of certain plant components, common in certain cultures may cause
AKI if they are not processed properly (e.g., djenkol, impila, Aveorrhea). Agricultural and
industrial workers have access to pesticides (e.g., paraquat and aluminum phosphide) and
industrial chemicals (e.g., copper sulfate) which are often used for suicidal purposes and
cause AKI.
Identifying plant and chemical toxin-induced AKI is challenging due to a number of
reasons (Table 25): underreporting (cultural trust in traditional healers or belief in the benign
nature of the source of toxin), nonspecific nature of symptoms (i.e., mimicking
gastroenteritis, rhabdomyolysis), contamination with other substances such as heavy metals
(e.g., mercury, lead) or adulterants (e.g., ethylene glycol).
Management usually entails supportive therapy, hydration, hemodynamic support,
and RRT if required. Hurdles include poor awareness, a lack of antidotes and limited access
181

D

R

AF
T

to RRT. Addressing AKI will require multidisciplinary strategies, including public education,
regulation of herbal products, and integrating traditional healers into healthcare systems.

182

Colchicum autumnale
(Meadow saffron)

Plant

Glycyrrhiza glabra
(Licorice)

Plant

Amanita phalloides
(Toxic mushrooms)
Carica papaya
(Papaya leaf)
Tamaris orientalis
(Takaout el badia)
Hypericum perforatum
(St. John’s wort)
Propolis
(Honeybee product)

Plant

Carp
(Fish gallbladder extract)
Caesalpinia decapetala
(Cat’s claw)

Animal
product
Plant

Can lead to watery diarrhea, jaundice,
bradycardia, hypotension, oligoanuria and AKI
AIN

Cerbera thevetia
(Yellow oleander)

Plant

ATN

Plant

Gastroenteritis/multiorgan failure/hepatic
injury/shock/AKI
Contains glycyrrhetinic acid - can lead to
hypokalemia, rhabdomyolysis, AKI,
pseudoaldosteronism
Gastroenteritis, hepatic failure, AKI

Severe mucositis and gastritis leading to severe
dehydration causing prerenal AKI
Can cause rhabdomyolysis and AKI

D
R

Plant
Plant

Plant/animal
product

Indication of use or exposure in the context
of AKI
Hypertension, arthritis
To induce fertility, to correct impotence, and to
ward off “evil spirits”

AF
T

Table 25 | Common plant and chemical toxins causing AKI
Substance
Type
Clinical manifestations
(source)
Aloe capensis
Plant
Abdominal pain, hemorrhagic gastroenteritis,
(Cape aloe)
ATN
Callilepis laureola
Plant
Abdominal pain, diarrhea, ATN, oliguric AKI,
(Impila)
hepatic dysfunction, hypoglycemia, metabolic
acidosis
Catha edulis
Plant
ATN
(Khat)

Induces cytochrome P450 enzyme-drug
interactions and AKI
AIN

183

Khat leaf chewing is a local habit in some
African populations; also used as a folk
remedy for obesity and depression.
Used for acute gouty arthritis. Suicidal
colchicine tablet overdose is the most common
cause of colchicine poisoning.
Cough remedy
Accidental ingestion, anticancer, antiinflammatory
To increase platelet count in dengue fever
Henna for hair dyeing
Used for depression and menopausal
symptoms
Used as antiseptic/ anti-inflammatory agent
and hepatoprotective substance in South
America
Used in folk therapies in parts of Asia
An herbal remedy used in Peru as antiinflammatory drug for rheumatism, systemic
lupus erythematosus, cirrhosis
Used as folk remedy for heart conditions,
asthma, epilepsy, cancer, and painful menstrual
periods

Plant

Crotalaria laburnifolia
(Bird flower)
Archidendron pauciflorum
(Djenkol beans)
Sobi-lobi
(Datura)
Salix daphnoides
(Willow bark)

Plant

1,2-Dibromo-3Chloropropane
(DBCP)
Heavy metals
(Cadmium, uranium, lead,
mercury)
Paraquat

Chemical
(pesticide)

Plant
Plant

Plant
Plant
Plant

ATN, interstitial nephritis, and hemoglobin
casts
Contains salicylates - can cause ischemic
kidney damage / cortical necrosis and AIN

Used as herbal remedy for bleeding piles and
painful menstrual cycles
Used as folk remedy for dysmenorrhea and
venereal diseases

ATN

Used as traditional medicine as an antiinflammatory agent, a purgative and for its
local anesthetic property
Used for dysmenorrhea and abortifacient

AF
T

Cupressus funebris
(Mourning cypress)
Securidaca
longepedunculata
(Wild wisteria)
Euphorbia paralias
(Spurge)

Acute tubular injury

Djenkolism - spasmodic suprapubic and/or
flank pain, urinary obstruction, and AKI
Contains anticholinergic substances; urinary
obstruction and AKI
The bark contains salicylate, which is
metabolized in the body to salicylate; renal
papillary necrosis
ATN observed in animal studies, potential
human carcinogen

D
R

Chemical
ATN in acute intoxication, over 90%
(environmenta absorption in proximal tubular cells
l)
Chemical
AKI, often with lung involvement and multiple
(herbicide)
organ failure
Methanol
Chemical
Metabolic acidosis leading to AKI, often with
(solvent)
visual and neurological impairment
Organophosphorus
Chemical
Ischemic ATN due to volume loss or systemic
compounds
(pesticide)
toxicity
Copper sulphate
Chemical
Systemic and local toxicity, acute tubular
(poison)
necrosis, hemolysis leading to AKI
Acetic Acid
Chemical
Coma, shock, hemolysis, anuric kidney failure,
(acid)
pigment nephropathy
Arsenic
Chemical
AKI with acute hemolysis, systemic toxicity
(poison)
AIN, acute interstitial nephritis; AKI, acute kidney injury; ATN, acute tubular necrosis
184

Local delicacy in Southeast Asia
Consumed for its hallucinogenic properties
Used for pain/headache and inflammatory
conditions in China and Europe
Agricultural pesticide/fumigant with
nematocidal activity
Environmental and industrial exposure
Agricultural herbicide, intentional or accidental
ingestion
Industrial solvent, accidental or intentional
ingestion
Agricultural pesticide, intentional or accidental
exposure
Industrial use, accidental or intentional
ingestion
Used in food preservation, accidental ingestion
Historical medical use, pesticide, intentional
poisoning

Practice Point 3.11.3: For children and adults presenting with AKD or AKI
following prolonged exposure to high temperatures, consider heat injury as a cause
of AKI.

AF
T

Heat injury, especially from heatstroke, can lead to AKI through dehydration,
hypotension, and direct tubular damage.501-503 Outdoor workers, particularly in tropical
regions, are highly vulnerable due to prolonged exposure to high temperatures and intense
physical labor. Those with limited access to water face an even greater risk. Workers in
construction, agriculture, and similar fields often lack consistent breaks or hydration
resources, especially in areas with poor infrastructure or employer oversight. Climate
change makes this worse by driving up temperatures and the frequency of heatwaves,
putting these workers at higher risk of heat-related kidney damage. Recurrent episodes of
AKI can progress to CKD and have been implicated in the genesis of CKD of unknown
etiology, especially in Central America and South Asia.504, 505
Prevention entails practical steps like staying hydrated by drinking water
regularly, avoiding strenuous work during the hottest parts of the day, taking rest breaks
in shaded areas, and gradually acclimating to hot environments to build tolerance. For
outdoor workers, employers should provide water access, enforce breaks, and train staff
to spot early heat stress signs like dizziness.

R

3.12 Considerations specific in children
3.12.1 Hemodynamic management
Practice Point 3.12.1.1: Use age-appropriate blood pressure targets to guide
hemodynamic management in children at risk or with AKI.

D

Avoidance of hypotension is a critical component of hemodynamic management.
The Surviving Sepsis Campaign defines pediatric hypotension by age-based systolic
thresholds (e.g., <50 mm Hg for infants <12 months, <60 mm Hg for children 1–5 years,
and <70 mm Hg for those >5 years), which are used to trigger resuscitative efforts in
septic shock and have been widely adopted in pediatric critical care. 323
Even brief durations of profound hypotension, defined by systolic BP below the
first percentile for age, sex, and height, are independently associated with increased risk
of new or persistent AKI in children with sepsis. In a large retrospective cohort study, the
odds of developing Stage 2 or 3 AKI increased by 9% for every doubling in time spent
under this severe hypotensive threshold, independent of other risk factors.506 This
association was not observed when hypotension was defined by Pediatric Advanced Life
Support thresholds, suggesting that individualized, percentile-based targets may be more
sensitive for identifying kidney hypoperfusion risk. Additionally, longer duration of
hypotension was associated with fewer AKI-free days and delayed kidney recovery,
highlighting the importance of early and sustained BP optimization. These findings
support the use of age-appropriate BP targets, ideally informed by physiologic norms, to
guide hemodynamic management in children at risk for or with AKI.
185

AF
T

Hemodynamic management for pediatric AKI relies primarily on extrapolated
adult evidence, with limited direct pediatric data. The only pediatric RCT is the GoalDirected Perfusion to Reduce Acute Kidney Injury after Paediatric Cardiac Surgery
(GDP-AKIp) trial, which demonstrated that goal-directed perfusion maintaining indexed
oxygen delivery ≥360 ml/min/m² during cardiopulmonary bypass reduced AKI from
42.2% to 28.1% in children undergoing cardiac surgery.389 No pediatric-specific MAP
targets exist. Elevated central venous pressure is associated with worse kidney function in
children with congenital cardiac disease, with eGFR declining acutely as central venous
pressure exceeds 6 mm Hg.507 For vasopressor selection, pediatric septic shock guidelines
recommend either epinephrine or norepinephrine as acceptable first-line agents,508 though
a recent propensity-matched study found norepinephrine was associated with lower
mortality compared to epinephrine without clear kidney benefit.509 Renal near-infrared
spectroscopy is the most studied pediatric-specific noninvasive hemodynamic monitoring
strategy, with multiple studies demonstrating that low intraoperative kidney tissue
oxygenation predicts subsequent AKI in cardiac surgery patients.510-512 Fluid management
should avoid both hypovolemia and hype
3.12.2 Nutritional intervention in AKI
Practice Point 3.12.2.1.: In children with AKI or AKD, age-recommended protein
targets can be used without protein restriction, and a minimum daily protein intake
of 2.5 grams/kg should be maintained for children receiving CRRT.

D

R

Protein-energy malnutrition is common in critically ill children with AKI and is
associated with adverse outcomes. Children receiving CRRT are at particularly high risk
due to increased protein requirements for growth and additional protein losses through the
extracorporeal circuit. Importantly, there is no evidence that protein intake at agerecommended protein levels delays kidney recovery in children with AKI, and restriction
may contribute to negative nitrogen balance and worse outcomes. In a large retrospective
study of 511 critically ill children, higher protein intake (≥80% of estimated needs) was
not associated with delayed resolution of AKI, even after adjustment for severity of
illness.481
Children receiving CRRT require even higher protein intake to counteract
extracorporeal losses. A prospective study of 41 children receiving CRRT found that
median protein delivery was 2.0 g/kg/day, with a substantial proportion failing to meet
institutional protein goals of 2.5 g/kg/day. Children who received only enteral nutrition
met protein goals only 13% of the time, while those on combined parenteral and enteral
support met goals 60% of the time. Transitioning from parenteral to enteral nutrition was
identified as a high-risk period for inadequate protein delivery.513 These findings
underscore the importance of maintaining at least 2.5 g/kg/day protein intake during
CRRT, with consideration of supplemental parenteral nutrition or protein additives when
enteral nutrition alone is insufficient.
186

Practice Point 3.12.2.2: Supplement water-soluble vitamins routinely in children
receiving CRRT.

AF
T

Compared with adults, infants and young children have lower baseline reserves of
many water-soluble vitamins and higher weight-adjusted metabolic requirements,
increasing the risk of clinically significant deficiency during prolonged RRT.
Observational data consistently demonstrate reductions in circulating concentrations of
several water-soluble vitamins during CRRT, and deficiency may develop rapidly in the
absence of supplementation.514 Deficiency of water-soluble vitamins in critically ill
children may contribute to impaired energy metabolism, lactic acidosis (thiamine
deficiency), compromised immune and antioxidant function (vitamin C deficiency),
neurologic dysfunction, cytopenias, and poor wound healing. Water-soluble vitamins
have a wide therapeutic index, and the risk of toxicity with appropriate supplementation is
low, as excess amounts are generally cleared.
Supplementation should be initiated at the start of CRRT and continued for the
duration of therapy. Dosing should account for age, weight, nutritional intake (enteral or
parenteral), and CRRT intensity. In some cases, higher-than-standard daily recommended
doses may be required to offset extracorporeal losses, particularly in infants, small
children, or those receiving high effluent rates.

R

3.12.3 Hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI
Practice Point 3.12.3.1: It is reasonable to use terlipressin or norepinephrine for
children with hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI depending on the clinical care
context and patient condition.

D

Pediatric hepatorenal syndrome physiology is similar to adult physiology but data
on terlipressin in children are limited. However, retrospective data suggests that
terlipressin may be effective in reversal of the hepatorenal pathology in children and is
safe to use in children when administered as an infusion in the ICU, as intermittent dosing
is associated with a higher incidence of gut ischemia.
Investigators retrospectively reviewed 16 pediatric participants with liver disease
and AKI who received terlipressin in a single center in the UK.515 Terlipressin
administration led to a sustained increase in MAP and improvement in kidney parameters,
particularly in participants with hepatorenal syndrome. Notably, terlipressin was
associated with improvements in SCr and urine output, especially in children with
hepatorenal syndrome (71.4% response rate at 48 hours). Adverse effects were reported
as 3 instances of digital ischemia and feeding intolerance. Although 47.5% of participants
died (28.5% in hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI subgroup), mortality was attributed
to underlying disease severity and not terlipressin use. Larger prospective trials are
needed to confirm the efficacy and assess the role of terlipressin as a bridge to
transplantation.
187

Data on the role of norepinephrine as an alternative is absent for children. In
children, evidence supporting vasoconstrictor therapy is sparse and largely derived from
observational studies, small case series, and extrapolation from adult data. Nevertheless,
the underlying pathophysiology of hepatorenal syndrome-associated AKI is similar across
age groups, and potential benefits in kidney perfusion and function are biologically
plausible. The Work Group judged that a cautious suggestion for use of terlipressin in
children is appropriate, with emphasis on individualized decision-making and careful
monitoring.
3.12.4 Theophylline use in neonates
Recommendation 3.12.4.1: We recommend a single dose of theophylline be given to
neonates with severe perinatal asphyxia for the prevention of AKI (1A).

AF
T

This recommendation places a high value on the reduction of AKI incidence in neonates
with severe perinatal asphyxia with a single dose of theophylline, given the consistent
short-term benefits and low risk of harm. However, the long-term kidney and
neurodevelopmental safety of this intervention remains incompletely understood, and
most studies to date were conducted in settings without therapeutic hypothermia.
Therefore, centers using therapeutic hypothermia should consider the lack of interaction
data when implementing this recommendation.

D

R

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Neonates with severe perinatal asphyxia have a high risk of AKI. Renal
hypoperfusion and ischemia–reperfusion injury are central mechanisms in this population.
Adenosine-mediated renal vasoconstriction contributes to reduced glomerular filtration in
the early post-asphyxia period. Theophylline, a nonselective adenosine receptor
antagonist, may attenuate this vasoconstriction and improve kidney blood flow when
administered shortly after birth.
A single early dose of theophylline has been shown to reduce the incidence and
severity of AKI in multiple RCTs. Meta-analysis of 5 RCTs comparing theophylline
versus no theophylline in a total of 356 neonates with perinatal asphyxia showed that
children treated with theophylline had a significantly lower incidence of AKI (OR: 0.24;
95% CI: 0.16–0.36). There was no difference in mortality (OR: 0.86; 95% CI: 0.46–1.62;
Supplementary Table S62).516
Theophylline has a narrow therapeutic index and is associated with potential
adverse effects, including cardiac arrhythmias, gastrointestinal disturbances, central
nervous system irritability, and potential drug interactions. However, in published
neonatal studies using a single prophylactic dose, serious adverse events have been
uncommon, and most reported side effects were transient and self-limited. The risk of
toxicity may be increased in preterm infants or in settings without appropriate dosing
188

accuracy and monitoring capacity. However, long-term neurodevelopmental outcomes
and safety in combination with therapeutic hypothermia remain understudied.
Certainty of evidence
There is high certainty of evidence that, for neonates with perinatal asphyxia,
theophylline greatly reduces the risk of AKI but may not affect risk of death, however,
with no evidence regarding serious adverse events among studies reporting AKI-related
outcomes.516

AF
T

Values and preferences
This recommendation places a high value on the prevention of AKI in neonates
with severe perinatal asphyxia, given its association with increased morbidity, mortality,
and long-term kidney risk. Healthcare professionals and caregivers are likely to prioritize
short-term improvements in kidney function and fluid balance, particularly when the
intervention is simple, inexpensive, and administered as a single dose. In settings with
limited capacity for close cardiorespiratory monitoring, healthcare professionals may
place greater weight on potential harms. Conversely, in settings where RRT is unavailable
or difficult to provide, the value placed on AKI prevention may be particularly high.
Overall, the Work Group considered that most informed parents and healthcare
professionals would favor administration of a single prophylactic dose of theophylline in
neonates with severe perinatal asphyxia to reduce the risk of AKI, given the seriousness
of the outcome and the generally low incidence of significant short-term adverse effects
when appropriately dosed.

D

R

Resource use and costs
The administration of a single dose of intravenous theophylline is a low-cost
intervention that requires minimal additional resources. Theophylline is available in both
low- and high-resource settings and is inexpensive. No specialized equipment or
monitoring beyond standard neonatal intensive care practices is needed. Because the
intervention is administered as a one-time dose within the first hour of life, it does not add
substantial labor or complexity to neonatal resuscitation or early postnatal care.
Importantly, the potential to prevent AKI may reduce downstream healthcare utilization.
As such, the use of prophylactic theophylline in eligible neonates is likely to be costsaving or cost-neutral from a healthcare system perspective, although this has not been
specifically studied.
Considerations for implementation
Successful implementation of this recommendation requires timely identification
of neonates with severe perinatal asphyxia and early administration of theophylline. This
necessitates clear local protocols for recognizing eligibility based on criteria such as
Apgar scores, cord pH, base deficit, and need for resuscitation. Standardization of dosing
and incorporation into neonatal resuscitation or post-resuscitation order sets may facilitate
uptake. In settings where therapeutic hypothermia is used, additional caution is warranted,
189

as data on the combined use of theophylline and cooling are limited. Even in resourcelimited settings, implementation is feasible because the intervention involves a single
dose and relies primarily on monitoring that is already standard for critically ill neonates.
Rationale
Neonates with severe perinatal asphyxia are at high risk for AKI due to renal
hypoperfusion and ischemia–reperfusion injury. Clinical trials in neonates have
demonstrated that a single prophylactic dose of theophylline administered shortly after
birth reduces the incidence of AKI, lowers peak SCr, improves urine output, and may
reduce the need for RRT.

AF
T

Although the number of RCTs is limited and most studies are relatively small, the
evidence consistently demonstrates kidney benefit with minimal harm. The magnitude of
benefit is particularly meaningful in settings where access to RRT is limited or
unavailable. The intervention is relatively simple, involving a single weight-based
intravenous dose, which limits cumulative drug exposure and toxicity risk. Reported
adverse effects in neonatal trials are generally mild and self-limited. Serious adverse
events are rare when dosing is appropriate.
The Work Group judged that the benefits clearly outweigh the potential harms,
supporting a Level 1 recommendation for use, with careful weight-based dosing and
monitoring.

R

3.12.5 Use of nitric oxide in children
Recommendation 3.12.5.1: We recommend against routine use of inhaled nitric
oxide to prevent cardiac surgery-associated AKI in children with low-complexity
cardiac lesions and no signs of pulmonary hypertension or right ventricular
dysfunction undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass (1C).

D

This recommendation applies specifically to children undergoing elective, low-complexity
congenital heart surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass who do not have significant
pulmonary hypertension or right ventricular dysfunction, in whom inhaled nitric oxide
did not reduce AKI or RRT in a large RCT. The Work Group judged that routine use of
inhaled nitric oxide in this setting is not recommended as it does not prevent AKI and may
introduce risks, cost, and unnecessary complexity without clear clinical advantages.
Inhaled nitric oxide may still be indicated for other cardiopulmonary indications in select
populations.
Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
AKI is a significant complication following cardiopulmonary bypass in
children.517 Inhaled nitric oxide has been proposed to reduce the risk of AKI by
enhancing renal perfusion; reducing ischemia–reperfusion injury, oxidative stress, and
hemolysis; preserving microvascular integrity; and attenuating inflammation. However,
190

there is no evidence supporting the clinical efficacy of inhaled nitric oxide for preventing
AKI in low-complexity pediatric cardiac surgeries.
A systematic review of 6 RCTs among children undergoing surgery with
cardiopulmonary bypass found that inhaled nitric oxide versus placebo had no effect on
mortality (5 trials, 1686 participants; RR: 1.11; 95% CI: 0.53–2.34), development of AKI
(1 trial, 1364 participants; RR: 1.16; 95% CI: 0.88–1.53), or use of RRT (1 trial, 1364
participants; RR: 0.94; 95% CI: 0.71–1.25; Supplementary Table S63).518-524

AF
T

Only one large, multicenter RCT has examined AKI in infants undergoing
congenital heart surgery and nitric oxide use. The Nitric Oxide During Cardiopulmonary
Bypass to Improve Recovery in Infants With Congenital Heart Defects trial (NITRIC)
was a large, multicenter, double-blind RCT conducted across 6 pediatric cardiac centers
in Australia, New Zealand, and the Netherlands.524 The trial enrolled 1371 children under
2 years of age undergoing elective, low-complexity congenital heart surgery with
cardiopulmonary bypass, comparing inhaled nitric oxide at 20 ppm delivered into the
cardiopulmonary bypass oxygenator with standard care. The primary outcome (ventilatorfree days at 28 days) did not differ significantly between groups (median 26.6 days vs.
26.4 days; P=0.92). There were no significant differences in secondary outcomes,
including the composite of low cardiac output syndrome, extracorporeal life support, or
death by day 28. Rates of postoperative AKI and RRT were also not significantly
different. These findings suggest that inhaled nitric oxide administration during
cardiopulmonary bypass does not improve clinical outcomes or reduce AKI incidence in
infants undergoing low-complexity congenital heart surgery.

D

R

In one small RCT of 16 children undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass surgery,
inhaled nitric oxide resulted in less loop diuretic use in the intervention arm (1.63 ml ±
0.9 vs. 3.25 ml ± 1.0 total within 48 hours; p<0.05) and less positive postoperative fluid
balance (187±122 vs. 317±271).518
Some evidence also suggests that inhaled nitric oxide may increase the risk of
AKI, particularly in children with acute lung injury or acute respiratory distress
syndrome. A systematic review and meta-analysis of 10 RCTs involving 1363
participants found that inhaled nitric oxide increased AKI risk (RR: 1.40; 95% CI: 1.06–
1.83; p=0.02), with a dose-dependent effect, as higher cumulative doses of inhaled nitric
oxide significantly increased AKI risk (RR: 1.52; p=0.004). However, this harm was
specific to participants with acute respiratory distress syndrome and was not observed in
non-acute respiratory distress syndrome populations.525 A 2016 Cochrane review, which
examined 4 studies, found that abnormal kidney function was more frequent in the
inhaled nitric oxide group compared to the control group, with a relative risk of 1.59
(95% CI: 1.17–2.16, I² = 0%).526
While inhaled nitric oxide is generally well tolerated when used short-term, there
are potential harms and adverse effects, including methemoglobinemia, nitrogen dioxide
191

toxicity, rebound pulmonary hypertension, systemic hypotension, platelet dysfunction,
and bleeding. These harms may negate any benefit when used for AKI prevention in the
absence of pulmonary hypertension.
The Work Group judged that the balance of benefits and harms of inhaled nitric
oxide for the specific purpose of AKI prevention is context-dependent. In children with
clear pulmonary hypertension or right ventricular dysfunction, inhaled nitric oxide may
provide cardiopulmonary benefit that justifies potential risks, with kidney protection as a
possible secondary advantage. However, when used solely for kidney protection in
hemodynamically stable children without pulmonary vascular disease, the anticipated
benefits are uncertain.

AF
T

Certainty of evidence
There is low certainty of evidence that in children undergoing cardiopulmonary
bypass inhaled nitric oxide during anesthesia does not affect the risk of AKI, RRT, death,
or length of stay, with imprecise estimates of serious adverse events. The certainty of
evidence was downgraded for imprecision and sparseness of data.518-524

R

Values and preferences
Most families and healthcare professionals place a high value on avoiding
unnecessary interventions in children undergoing low-complexity cardiac surgery,
particularly when the anticipated benefit is uncertain and the therapy involves additional
cost, monitoring, and potential risks. Parents and caregivers are likely to value avoidance
of unnecessary medications, potential side effects, and additional interventions. The
principle of minimizing nonessential therapies in children is often strongly supported in
shared decision-making discussions.

D

Many healthcare professionals would prioritize minimizing exposure to therapies
that do not demonstrate clear and consistent benefit on patient-important outcomes. Some
variability in preferences may exist, and some healthcare professionals may favor broader
use of inhaled nitric oxide, based on institutional experience, physiologic rationale, or
perceived safety. However, in the absence of compelling evidence of benefit in children
at low risk, most informed healthcare professionals would likely favor a conservative
approach.
Resource use and costs
Inhaled nitric oxide is a high-cost intervention that requires specialized delivery
systems, continuous monitoring, and trained personnel for safe administration. The
infrastructure needed to deliver inhaled nitric oxide, whether integrated into the
cardiopulmonary bypass circuit or postoperatively in the ICU, may not be readily
available in all settings, particularly in low- and middle-resource settings. In the absence
of demonstrated benefit for AKI prevention in low-risk pediatric cardiac surgical
populations, routine use of inhaled nitric oxide represents a poor allocation of resources.
192

Its continued use in this context may divert financial and staffing capacity from
interventions with stronger evidence of clinical efficacy.

AF
T

Considerations for implementation
This recommendation applies specifically to children undergoing elective, lowcomplexity congenital heart surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass, such as ventricular
septal defect or atrial septal defect repairs, who do not have significant pulmonary
hypertension or ventricular dysfunction. In these children, inhaled nitric oxide should not
be used solely for the purpose of AKI prevention. However, inhaled nitric oxide may still
be indicated for other clinical reasons. It is important that healthcare professionals do not
generalize this recommendation to higher-risk populations, such as those with singleventricle physiology, complex cyanotic heart lesions, or preexisting pulmonary vascular
disease, where the benefit-risk profile may differ.
Rationale
Cardiac surgery–associated AKI is related to ischemia–reperfusion injury,
inflammation, hemolysis, hemodynamic instability, and venous congestion during and
after cardiopulmonary bypass. Inhaled nitric oxide has been proposed as a preventive
strategy based on its potential to improve right ventricular performance, enhance
pulmonary vascular function, mitigate hemolysis-mediated nitric oxide depletion, and
attenuate oxidative stress.

D

R

Available clinical studies evaluating inhaled nitric oxide for AKI prevention in
pediatric cardiac surgery are limited, heterogeneous, and largely conducted in mixed or
higher-risk populations. Evidence does not consistently demonstrate a meaningful
reduction in patient-important outcomes such as need for RRT, prolonged ICU stay, or
mortality. Furthermore, inhaled nitric oxide therapy carries potential risks and burdens,
including methemoglobinemia, nitrogen dioxide exposure, rebound pulmonary
hypertension with abrupt discontinuation, platelet inhibition, and potential contribution to
postoperative bleeding. Although these harms are generally uncommon and manageable,
their relevance increases when expected benefit is small or uncertain.
Accordingly, the recommendation against routine use reflects the low baseline
risk of severe AKI, lack of evidence of clinically meaningful benefit, and the additional
risks and resource implications associated with inhaled nitric oxide therapy in this setting.

193

CHAPTER 4. DRUG- AND NEPHROTOXIN-ASSOCIATED
AKI
Drug-associated kidney disease is a significant problem in community- and hospitalbased care. Approximately one-fourth of all medications used in hospitals can cause injury to
the kidneys, and these substances contribute to approximately one-fourth of all AKI episodes.
There are multiple mechanisms by which drugs can cause AKI or AKD, although not all
involve structural damage to the renal tubules or other parenchymal components.
Medications like renin-angiotensin system inhibitors (RASi) and sodium glucose transporter
2 inhibitors (SGLT2i) may cause a rise in SCr through hemodynamic effects on GFR but
confer proven and clinically significant outcome-modifying benefits for high-risk patient
populations, including those with heart failure, CKD, and diabetes.

AF
T

Iodinated contrast agents have long been associated with AKI, but their direct effect
on kidney function and nephrotoxicity remains debated. Meanwhile, the types of contrast
media and clinical practices to increase the safety of radiocontrast exposure have changed
considerably over time.

R

This chapter provides guidance on drug stewardship and contrast use in people at risk
of or with AKI or AKD. Throughout this chapter, the terms "nephrotoxic" and
"nephrotoxicity" are used only to describe medications or chemicals when they cause
structural damage to the kidneys. This is intended to makes clear a distinction between drug
effects on GFR due to alterations in kidney hemodynamics, from those that induce structural
kidney damage.

D

4.1. Categorization and classification of medications associated with AKI
Practice Point 4.1.1: Drugs that may contribute to AKI can be classified into one of 4
categories based on kidney function and damage biomarkers assessed at the time of
exposure (Figure 11).

194

AF
T

D

R

Figure 11 | Classifying drugs that potentially cause AKI.527 Iterative classification of
agents that have potential to cause kidney dysfunction/abnormal kidney function or kidney
injury or both. Functional and injury biomarkers have a role in distinguishing among the
different pathophysiological processes. Examples of deleterious risk modifiers are duration
of therapy, drug burden, hypotension, and pharmaco/pharmacodynamic interactions.
Examples of interventions to mitigate risk are daily dynamic prescribing, kidney monitoring,
and patient and provider education. Susceptibility factors include those listed in Table 14 in
Chapter 2. Any final impact depends on underlying susceptibility, associated risk factors,
clinical context, drug management, and modifying factors. Examples of drugs that
correspond to the relevant categories above include trimethoprim, cimetidine (neither
dysfunction nor damage); angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor
blockers (dysfunction without damage); aminoglycoside, acyclovir, vascular endothelial
growth factor antagonists (damage without dysfunction); and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (dysfunction and damage). AKI, acute kidney injury. Adapted from Ostermann et al.
2020.528
The 4 categories presented in Figure 11 classify drugs as those that affect SCr
concentration but do not cause abnormal kidney function (e.g., decline in GFR, dysfunction)
or structural damage, drugs that may cause damage but not dysfunction, may cause
dysfunction but not damage, and drugs that may cause both damage and dysfunction.527 The
mechanisms of toxicity vary. They can also be further categorized by assessing whether they
are predictable based on the pharmacology of the drug and dose dependency, or unpredictable
not based on the pharmacology of the drug and not dose-dependent. Further, the processes are
dynamic. For instance, initial tubular damage without dysfunction can later lead to abnormal
kidney function.
a) Neither dysfunction nor damage: Drugs that are known to interfere with the tubular
secretion of creatinine, interfere with creatinine assay measurements, or increase
195

creatinine production without damage to the kidney’s glomeruli, tubules, or
interstitium can cause a rise in SCr without underlying damage or dysfunction. The
resulting clinical condition has been termed pseudo-AKI in the literature (Table 26).
Table 26 | List of drug/drug classes associated with pseudo-AKI and their possible mechanisms.
Dug/drug classes
Mechanisms
Antibiotics/antivirals:a Trimethoprimb,
Competing with and decreasing proximal tubule
pyrimethamine, cobicistat, dolutegravir
creatinine secretion in a dose-dependent
manner, mediated via the inhibition of drug
Antiarrhythmics: Dronedarone
efflux transporters such as organic cation
transporter
Gastrointestinal agents: Cimetidine

AF
T

Antineoplastics: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (e.g.,
imatinib, bosutinib, sorafenib, sunitinib,
crizotinib, gefitinib, and pazopanib)
Poly-ADP-ribose polymerase
inhibitors (e.g., olaparib, niraparib talazoparib)
Cyclin-dependent kinase 4/6 inhibitors (e.g.,
palbociclib, abemaciclib, ribociclib)

Anaplastic lymphoma kinase
inhibitors (e.g., crizotinib, ceritinib, alectinib,
brigatinib, lorlatinib)

D

R

Others: Probenecid
Creatine supplements (both short-term and long- Increasing the precursor of creatinine
term)
Corticosteroids
Increasing catabolic state is associated with the
release of creatine from muscle, spontaneously
converted to creatinine
Some formulations of dexamethasone may
contain creatinine as a buffer excipient.
Azasetron
Some formulations may contain creatinine as a
buffer excipient.
Fenofibrate
Increasing the metabolic production of
creatinine
Cephalosporins (e.g., cephalothin, cefazolin,
Interfering with the analytical measurement of
cephalexin, cefoxitin, cefaclor, cephradine),
creatinine (Jaffe method)
clavulanic acid
5-Flucytosine
Interfering with the analytical measurement of
creatinine (Ektachem enzymatic system)
Calcitriol and alfacalcidol
Unknown
a
Pseudo-AKI via inhibiting organic anion transporters 1 and 3 in proximal tubule has also been
reported with antibiotic combinations such as piperacillin/tazobactam or vancomycin plus
piperacillin/tazobactam.529, 530 Nevertheless, interstitial nephritis due to piperacillin/tazobactam has
been documented in the literature.531, 532 Thus, it seems prudent not to place piperacillin/tazobactam
into the “neither dysfunction nor damage” category. bSulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim should be
discriminated from trimethoprim alone and viewed as an independent agent because of described
interstitial nephritis or crystal nephropathy cases induced by sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim.533

196

Therefore, sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim may not match the “neither dysfunction nor damage”
category. AKI, acute kidney injury. Reproduced from Karimzadeh et al. 2023.527

b) Damage without dysfunction: Many drugs commonly referred to as nephrotoxic can
fit within this category. There are multiple mechanisms of kidney damage (e.g.,
vascular/glomerular damage, tubular injury, crystal formation, interstitial nephritis
etc.; Table 27). As kidney function is not affected, SCr will not change. Reliance on
SCr alone as a marker of AKI means that these events may go undetected until they
progress and affect kidney function (and SCr) as well.

AF
T

Table 27 | Examples of mechanisms and nephrotoxins that cause damage (structure changes to
the kidneys) without dysfunction (reduction in GFR)
Mechanism
Examples
Acute tubular injury
Aminoglycosides, amphotericin, colistin, vancomycin,
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Acute interstitial nephritis
Antibiotics, proton pump inhibitors
Glomerular disorder
Hydralazine
Tubular obstruction
Acyclovir
Vascular damage
Mitomcyin, tacrolimus
GFR, glomerular filtration rate

c) Dysfunction without damage: This category refers to the effects of drugs through
systematic hypoperfusion and/or a decline in the intraglomerular pressure that lead to
a decrease in GFR and increase in SCr without structural damage. Examples are
ACEi, ARBs, and SGLT2i. Notably, the acute reduction in GFR can be anticipated
and desirable as in the case of ACEi, ARB, or SGLT2i use for renoprotection of
people with CKD and proteinuria.

D

R

d) Dysfunction with damage: These include many drugs exerting more than one effect of
structural damage or prolonged damage leading to reduced GFR. Examples include
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), calcineurin inhibitors,
aminoglycosides, and amphotericin B.
Of relevance to clinical decision making, some classes of drugs can cause an acute
reduction in GFR but confer important long-term kidney and cardiovascular health benefits
(e.g., ACEi, ARB, and SGLT2i). This is particularly relevant to management of people with
heart failure and CKD, who may have a rise in SCr meeting criteria for AKI or AKD
following initiation or dose escalation of such medications. Small declines in eGFR in such
situations are expected and have been associated with better long-term outcomes. Similarly,
diuretics for acute heart failure may cause hemoconcentration and changes in SCr
concentration meeting AKI criteria. However, achieving decongestion in this situation is
crucial for improving both short- and long-term outcomes.

197

4.2. Kidney protective strategies
Recommendation 4.2.1: For children or adults with or at risk of AKI, we recommend
drug and nephrotoxin stewardship using a multimodal approach (1C).

AF
T

This recommendation places high value on patient safety by seeking to minimize the risk of
adverse reactions to drugs eliminated by the kidney and by reducing the incidence and
severity of AKI related to drug exposures. It emphasizes the principles of drug stewardship
which refers to the use of multiple strategies to promote responsible, effective, and safe use of
medicines to ensure they are initiated when needed at the right dose, monitored and dose
adjusted as needed to prevent or minimize harm, and are discontinued when no longer
beneficial to a person’s health. A clinical pharmacist often leads this form of multimodal
stewardship, but other healthcare professionals may take on this role. This recommendation
places a lower value on the additional resource use associated with the multimodal drug
stewardship. Although the certainty of evidence for a multimodal strategy is low (or very
low), the Work Group felt that a Level 1 recommendation was warranted given the potential
for harm and cost reduction in applicable populations.

D

R

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Drug and nephrotoxin stewardship strategies offer the benefits of safer and more
effective use of medications. Potential harms include avoidance of otherwise effective
medications for the treatment of acute and chronic illnesses due to fears of causing AKI.
Other challenges are differences in financial costs between different drugs with different
nephrotoxic potential. The balance between risk and benefit comes into consideration when
prescribing potentially nephrotoxic medications or medications cleared by the kidney and
deciding when benefits of treatment exceed the risk of causing or worsening AKI, and
whether it is appropriate to initiate, dose-adjust, or discontinue such medications. Drug
stewardship can help support these decisions by improving recognition of potential
medication harms and involving multidisciplinary healthcare professionals in medication
stewardship decisions to balance protection of kidney health while ensuring adequate
treatment of underlying diseases with acceptable levels of AKI risk.
Vancomycin has been the focus of several studies. A review of 9 studies (1 RCT and
8 nonrandomized controlled studies), including a total of 1973 adults showed that
vancomycin administered via continuous infusion was associated with a significantly lower
risk of AKI (OR: 0.47; 95% CI: 0.34–0.64) compared to intermittent dosing but there was no
difference in mortality (Supplementary Table S64).534-536
A systematic review of 12 nonrandomized controlled studies including 7548 adults
concluded that vancomycin dosing based on AUC was associated with a significantly lower
risk of AKI development compared to trough-only guided dosing (RR: 0.68; 95% CI: 0.59–
0.77; Supplementary Table S65).537

198

Based on data of 9 RCTs, including 18,355 adults, the use of CDSS with therapeutic
vancomycin monitoring compared with not using CDSS was not associated with prevention
of AKI (RR: 1.11; 95% CI: 0.99–1.24; Supplementary Table S66).151
Data from 35 studies (1 RCT, 15 nonrandomized studies, and 19 pre-post reports),
including 2 studies in children, concluded that pharmacist interventions for vancomycin
monitoring reduced the risk of AKI (RR: 0.59; 95% CI: 0.48–0.72; Supplementary Table
S67).538, 539 The 2 studies in children provided a consistent, but highly imprecise estimate of
risk of AKI (RR: 0.30; 95% CI: 0.04–2.34).540, 541

AF
T

Other studies evaluated monitoring of beta-lactam and other antibiotics. A review of 3
studies in adults (1 RCT and 2 nonrandomized controlled studies) concluded that therapeutic
drug monitoring of beta-lactam antibiotics (in 2 studies542, 543) or of various antibiotics
(vancomycin, ciprofloxacin, meropenem, and ceftriaxone (1 study155) did not affect the
development of AKI (Supplementary Table S68). A single RCT compared conventional
versus prolonged infusion of meropenem in 102 neonates and showed a lower risk of AKI
with more prolonged infusion (RR: 0.25; 95% CI:0.07–0.83; Supplementary Table S69).544
The role of therapeutic drug monitoring to prevent aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity has
only been investigated in observational studies. A meta-analysis of 5 observational studies
involving 615 participants were reported for gentamicin, and 2 observational studies
involving 159 participants were identified for amikacin. The analysis concluded that target
trough concentrations (Cmin) <2 mg/l for gentamicin and Cmin <10 mg/l for amikacin may
reduce the risk of nephrotoxicity.545

D

R

The role of pharmacist-led interventions in prevention of AKI outcomes has been
investigated in children and adults. As mentioned earlier, pharmacist interventions based on
vancomycin monitoring reduced the risk of AKI in children and adults.538, 539 A single RCT
in 150 adults in the ICU compared the involvement of a clinical pharmacist (i.e., drug
selection, drug administration routes, drug dose adjustment, drug-drug interactions, drug-food
interactions, drug side effect management, and drug incompatibility) with no interventions by
a clinical pharmacist and showed a lower risk of drug induced AKI in participants
randomized to the intervention group (RR: 0.39; 95% CI: 0.19–0.79; Supplementary Table
S70).546
Overall, these studies demonstrate that drug stewardship including therapeutic drug
monitoring and informed interventions can prevent drug induced AKI. However, additional
resources (laboratory, experts, costs) are needed. Also, in some situations, administration of
nephrotoxic drugs may be needed to treat the underlying illness. Importantly, drug
stewardship is only 1 strategy to protect kidney health and may not be sufficient to prevent
multi-factorial AKI.

199

Certainty of evidence
There is moderate certainty of evidence that continuous versus intermittent infusion of
vancomycin reduces the risk of AKI in adults but does not affect mortality. The certainty was
downgraded for some methodological limitations and sparseness of data.534-536 There were no
eligible studies comparing vancomycin infusion in children.
There is low certainty of evidence that AUC dosing of vancomycin versus troughbased dosing reduces the risk of AKI in adults but does not affect mortality (with very low
certainty of evidence). The certainty was downgraded for methodological limitations of
observational studies and, for mortality, sparseness of data.537 There were no eligible studies
comparing vancomycin infusion in children.

AF
T

There is low certainty of evidence regarding CDSS interventions (including
therapeutic monitoring) for vancomycin in adults. The overall certainty of evidence was
based on prioritizing incident AKI, but there is moderate certainty of evidence for a possible
increase in RRT and mostly moderate to high certainty of evidence for mortality and other
sequelae of AKI.151, 547 The certainty of evidence for incident AKI was reduced due to
sparseness of data (adequately powered single study). The certainty of evidence for RRT was
downgraded for imprecision. There were no eligible studies of CDSS interventions for
vancomycin in children.

R

For adults with AKI, with low certainty of evidence, pharmacist involvement in
vancomycin dosing is associated with reduced risk of death and incident AKI. The certainty
of evidence was downgraded for methodological quality (almost all data come from
observational studies).538, 539 From a subset of these studies, there is very low certainty of
evidence of a similar effect in children; however, the certainty of evidence for children was
also downgraded for inconsistency and imprecision.

D

Antibiotic monitoring (other than for vancomycin) in adults with AKI has low
certainty of evidence of no effect on AKI.155, 542, 543 The certainty of evidence was
downgraded for sparseness (for monitoring of specific antibiotics), methodological
limitations of the studies, and imprecision. There were no eligible studies of antibiotic
monitoring overall in children.
There is very low certainty of evidence that slow infusion of meropenem in neonates
reduces the risk of all-cause mortality and AKI compared with conventional infusion.544 The
certainty of evidence was downgraded for methodological limitations and sparseness of
evidence from a single study.
There is low certainty that pharmacist monitoring of all drugs in adults in the ICU
may reduce the risk of AKI. The certainty was downgraded for some methodological
limitations and sparseness of data.546 There were no eligible studies of pharmacist monitoring
of all drugs in children.
200

Values and preferences
Drug and nephrotoxin stewardship are predicated on the understanding that there are
no specific treatments available for AKI and that patients and healthcare professionals prefer
prevention. This recommendation values diligent monitoring through stewardship efforts to
avoid thinking that drug-related kidney disease is an accepted risk for all. It is a preference
towards an active approach to patient-centered care designed to avoid medication-related
harm.

AF
T

Resource use and costs
Available resources are an important consideration in the selection of stewardship
strategies and require that institutions commit resources to medication safety (Table 28).548
Resources to accomplish drug and nephrotoxin stewardship include support for healthcare
professionals committed and assigned to providing the set of coordinated patient care
management strategies. When deciding the cost of personnel, it is important to consider the
immediate and long-term cost of drug-related acute kidney diseases. The additional costs of
dedicating personnel and resources to support drug stewardship could be offset by reduced
total drug costs, shorter lengths of stay in ICU and hospital, and improved downstream health
status by avoiding AKI.549

R

Considerations for implementation
Drug and nephrotoxin stewardship encompass a set of coordinated patient care
management strategies to improve the appropriate and safe use of drugs for the kidneys.
Medication safety requires the provision of appropriate drug dosing (avoidance of overdosing
or underdosing) to people at risk or with AKI and appropriate monitoring for kidney
dysfunction or damage. Examples of the elements of multimodal drug and nephrotoxin
stewardship are provided in Table 28. Successful implementation requires strategic planning,
multidisciplinary collaboration, effective education, technological support, and ongoing
evaluation.

D

Table 28 | Multimodal approach to drug and nephrotoxin stewardship
Objective
Examples of fundamental approaches
Appropriate drug dosing
• Monitor changes/trends in kidney function and select
to prevent adverse drug
appropriate dosing for drugs eliminated by the kidney.
reactions
• Therapeutic drug monitoring of drugs eliminated by the
kidney with narrow therapeutic indices.
Prevent AKI, AKD, CKD
development or
progression, promote
resolution of AKI

•
•
•

Monitor pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic drug-drug
interactions with potential for nephrotoxicity including a
nephrotoxic burden assessment.
Therapeutic drug monitoring of nephrotoxic drugs with
narrow therapeutic indices.
Where available, use pharmacologic evidence-based
prevention strategies for specific drugs, for fluid therapy to
prevent crystalline nephropathies.

AKI, acute kidney injury; AKD, acute kidney disease; CKD, chronic kidney disease

201

AF
T

Rationale
There are multiple approaches to prevent the development or progression of drug- or
nephrotoxin-related AKD or adverse events from drugs eliminated by the kidney. As no
single strategy has demonstrated superiority over others, the best option for surveillance and
mitigation of drug related adverse events in people of all ages is to employ a set of multiple,
coordinated management strategies (multimodal approach) in people at risk for these
complications.550 Selecting a less nephrotoxic drug in people at-risk for AKI, reducing
nephrotoxin burden, or applying dose reduction/trough reduction to minimize exposure as
part of a stewardship strategy can result in improved clinical outcomes and reduce drug use
and related costs. Therapeutic drug monitoring, and surveillance for drug-drug interactions
have also been included in effective interventions. Table 31 of the KDIGO 2024 Clinical
Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD provides suggestions for
non-nephrotoxic alternatives to nephrotoxic drugs.17 These alternatives can also be applied to
people with AKI or AKD. The impact of medication burden and the principles of medication
reviews and reconciliation to ensure medication safety that are outlined in Figure 46 of the
KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD also
apply to people with AKI or AKD.17 However, in the context of AKI and potentially
fluctuating GFR, closer monitoring and more frequent adjustments may be required.

R

Practice Point 4.2.1: Strategies to manage drug-related acute kidney disease include:
d) discontinuation of offending nephrotoxic agents known to cause kidney damage,
if possible;
e) provision of a therapeutic equivalent alternative that is less nephrotoxic, if
available and necessary;
f) reduction in dose if drug continuation is necessary for those drugs with a dose
dependent direct nephrotoxic effect.

D

An assessment of risk versus benefit is required when determining whether to
discontinue or continue medications in situations where ongoing exposure can possibly lead
to development or progression of AKI. This decision should be made with consideration of
the availability of therapeutically equivalent, alternative agents, and the relative effectiveness
of alternative agents for the clinical condition the drug is being prescribed for. Another factor
to consider is whether to opt for dose reduction versus discontinuation which may be affected
by the mechanism of nephrotoxicity. If toxicity is dose dependent, a dose reduction may be
beneficial as opposed to dose-independent toxicity (e.g.,, in drug-induced acute interstitial
nephritis) where drug discontinuation is required.
Practice Point 4.2.2: Therapeutic drug monitoring is a component of multimodal
stewardship that involves serial assessments of drug concentrations in children and
adults receiving potentially nephrotoxic drugs, drugs excreted by the kidneys, and
drugs with narrow therapeutic margins or low therapeutic indices.
Therapeutic drug monitoring is the clinical practice of measuring plasma
concentrations of specific drugs at designated intervals to optimize drug dosing. It can be
202

used to assess drugs with narrow therapeutic indices that cause nephrotoxicity, are eliminated
by the kidneys, or both. (Table 29).551, 552 Therapeutic drug monitoring is appropriate for
potentially nephrotoxic drugs that require vigilant monitoring to prevent AKI development or
progression.553 An appropriately trained member of the care team or a CDSS is needed to
interpret therapeutic drug monitoring results and make dosage adjustments.551 Follow-up
monitoring after drug discontinuation may be needed if supratherapeutic drug concentrations
are observed.554 Importantly, there is a strong association between nonadherence to
therapeutic drug monitoring guidelines for antibiotics and the development of
nephrotoxicity.555 Therapeutic drug monitoring should also be considered for classes of
medications that depend on renal clearance and may accumulate in case of reduced kidney
function (Table 29).

R

AF
T

Table 29 | Therapeutic drug monitoring for drugs that are potentially nephrotoxic or excreted
by the kidney
Drug class
Examples
Characteristic(s)
Antibiotics
Amikacin,
Both excreted by the kidney and potentially
Gentamicin
nephrotoxic
Tobramycin
Vancomycin
Both excreted by the kidney and potentially
nephrotoxic
Antineoplastics
Methotrexate
Both excreted by the kidney and potentially
nephrotoxic
Antiepileptics
Phenobarbital
Excreted by the kidney
Antifungals
Voriconazole
Excreted by the kidney
Cardiac drugs
Lidocaine
Excreted by the kidney
Digoxin
Excreted by the kidney
Immunosuppressants Cyclosporine,
Both excreted by the kidney and potentially
Tacrolimus
nephrotoxic
Sirolimus
Psychiatric drugs
Lithium
Both excreted by the kidney and potentially
nephrotoxic

D

Practice Point 4.2.3: Surveillance for pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic drugdrug interactions that increase the risk of AKI is a component of multimodal
stewardship.
There are several pharmacokinetic drug-drug interactions that potentiate the
likelihood of developing AKI (Table 30).556 Some of these interactions can be avoided by
selecting alternative drugs that do not alter the metabolism of another drug (i.e. selecting
azithromycin instead of erythromycin and clarithromycin to reduce the risk of
rhabdomyolysis when coadministration with a statin is necessary).
Also, several pharmacodynamic drug combinations can result in an increased risk of
developing AKI, for instance the coadministration of NSAIDs, diuretics, and RASi. 556, 557
While it may be necessary to continue coadministration of drugs such as ACEi and diuretics
for people with congestive heart failure, coadministration of NSAIDS can often be avoided.

203

The likelihood of developing AKI increases depending on the number of nephrotoxin
exposures for an individual. Nephrotoxic burden refers to the cumulative or aggregate
exposure to nephrotoxins, with consideration to the nephrotoxic potential for each drug,
evaluated within a relevant time frame.550, 558-560 Specifically, each additional nephrotoxin has
been estimated to contribute to a 1.2–1.8-fold increase in odds of AKI per drug in children
and a 1.2–3.2-fold increase in odds per drug in adults.561 Calculations for assessing
nephrotoxic burden have been proposed.558, 562, 563 Surveillance for the nephrotoxic burden of
≥3 drugs with notification to the healthcare professional using CDSS has been shown to
reduce AKI incidence and severity in children.420, 564, 565

D

R

AF
T

Table 30 | Examples of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic drug-drug interactions
associated with risk of kidney damage or dysfunction 556
Drug-drug
Interacting drug/drug class
Proposed mechanism increasing
interaction type
the risk of kidney damage or
dysfunction
Pharmacodynamic
NSAIDs and diuretics
Decrease in prostaglandin synthesis
with NSAID administration causing
vasoconstriction of the afferent
arteriole and a decrease in effective
blood volume with diuretics
NSAIDS and diuretic plus RASi
Cumulative pharmacodynamic effect
“triple whammy”
from the administration of each drugdecrease in prostaglandin synthesis
with NSAID administration causing
vasoconstriction of the afferent
arteriole and a decrease in effective
blood volume with diuretics
exacerbated by the efferent arteriolar
vasodilation caused by the RASi.
Pharmacokinetic
Calcium channel blockers and
Cytochrome P459 3A4 (CYP3A4)
clarithromycin/erythromycin
enzyme inhibition with
clarithromycin causing elevated
concentrations of calcium channel
blockers that are metabolized by
CYP3A4 leading to systemic
hypotension and indirect abnormal
kidney function. Drug-drug
interactions could also be applicable
to other CYP3A4 isoenzyme
inhibitors.
Statins and calcium channel
Certain calcium channel blockers
blockers
(amlodipine, diltiazem, felodipine,
nicardipine, nifedipine, and
verapamil) inhibit CYP450 3A4
metabolism of statins leading to
increased statin concentration,
rhabdomyolysis, and AKI.
Statins and
Certain statins (simvastatin,
clarithromycin/erythromycin
lovastatin, and atorvastatin) are
metabolized by CYP3A4 isoenzyme
and inhibition with macrolides causes

204

increased serum statin concentrations
leading to rhabdomyolysis and AKI.
AKI, acute kidney injury; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; RASi, renin-angiotensinaldosterone inhibitor

Practice Point 4.2.4: Intravenous hydration strategies may be used for the prevention of
drug-induced crystalline nephropathies as part of multimodal stewardship.

D

R

AF
T

Intravenous crystalloid fluid administration is commonly used for the prevention of
AKI when drugs are indicated that cause crystalline nephropathies.566, 567 However, there is
no consensus on optimal hydration protocols. Typical prescriptions in adults include
administration of 1–2 l of intravenous isotonic crystalloids pre- and post-medication
administration. Table 31 describes strategies for prevention of drug-induced crystalline
nephropathies, including isotonic fluids and urinary alkalinization.568

205

Preventive and therapeutic strategiesa
IVFs before/during drug, alkalinize urine,
adjust drug dose for kidney function; folinic
acid; glucarbidase (<60 h after methotrexate);
high-flux HD in certain circumstances

D
R

AF
T

Table 31 | Drug-induced crystalline nephropathies
Culprit medication
Clinical kidney
Histologic findings
syndromes
Methotrexate
Crystalluria, AKI, and Crystals form annular structures consisting of
CKD
small needle-shaped crystals that stain
yellow, golden, or brown on H&E stain,
weak rim staining on PAS, black staining on
JS, and positively birefringent on polarization
Sulfadiazine,
Crystalluria, AKI,
Interstitial fibrosis with mild mononuclear
sulfamethoxazole
CKD, and
inflammation observed in absence of sulfa
nephrolithiasis
crystals within tubules or interstitium
Indinavir, atazanavir,
Crystalluria, AKI,
Translucent, needle-shaped indinavir,
darunavir
CKD, and
atazanavir, or darunavir crystals within
nephrolithiasis
tubules with an associated monocytic
infiltrate and giant-cell reaction
Acyclovir
Crystalluria, AKI, and Needle-shaped crystals within tubules
CKD
+/−peritubular inflammation and positively
birefringent on polarization
Ciprofloxacin,
Crystalluria and AKI
Needle-shaped crystals within tubules and
levofloxacin
strongly birefringent with polarization
iv ascorbic acid,
Crystalluria, AKI, and Crystals are translucent to pale blue fan-like
orlistat (by causing
CKD
or sunburst shapes within tubules and
enteric hyperoxaluria),
interstitium with interstitial inflammation and
ethylene glycol
positively birefringent on polarization
Sodium phosphate
AKI and CKD
Granular bluish-purplish crystal deposits with
purgative (oral rather
positive von Kossa staining and negative
than enema)
birefringence on polarization
Triamterene
Crystalluria, AKI,
Crystals stain yellow/brown on H&E and
CKD, and
PAS, silver-positive on JS, and strongly
nephrolithiasis
birefringent on polarization
Amoxicillin
Crystalluria and AKI
No histologic evidence of intrarenal deposits
of amoxicillin crystals on biopsy
Foscarnet
AKI, hematuria,
Plates and geometric shapes in dilated
proteinuria, and CKD
capillary loops and tubular lumens associated
and positively birefringent on polarization
206

Alkalinize urine, adjust dose for kidney
function, assure euvolemia before drug
exposure
No role for urine acidification, assure
euvolemia during drug therapy; switch to
different medication
Avoid rapid iv bolus, adjust drug dose for
kidney function, assure euvolemia during
drug therapy
Assure euvolemia during drug therapy and
avoid alkaline urine (if possible)
Ascorbic acid and orlistat: assure euvolemia
during drug therapy, avoid other
nephrotoxins; fomepizole and HD for
ethylene glycol
Assure euvolemia before exposure, avoid
concomitant NSAIDs, diuretics, and RAS
blockers
Alkalinize urine, assure euvolemia during
drug therapy
Assure euvolemia, adjust drug dose for
kidney function
Assure euvolemia during drug therapy and
adjust drug dose for kidney function

a

D
R

AF
T

Treatment includes drug discontinuation, intravenous (iv) fluids for hypovolemia, and supportive care including dialysis. H&E, hematoxylin and
eosin; HD, hemodialysis; IVF, intravenous fluid; JS, Jones methenamine silver; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; PAS, periodic
acid–Schiff; RAS, renin-angiotensin system. Reproduced with permission from Perazella et al. 2022.568

207

4.3. Implementation of kidney protective strategies
Practice Point 4.3.1: Pharmacists should perform medication reconciliation and
medication regimen reviews and perform drug and nephrotoxin stewardship for
hospitalized children and adults with or at risk of AKI.

AF
T

Hospitalized children and adults are at risk for medication errors, adverse drug events,
and therapeutic failures of inappropriately prescribed medications. Several studies have
evaluated the relationship between pharmacist oversight of people in hospital with AKI.
Pharmacist interventions in adults have been associated with better processes of care and
clinical outcomes, including lower risks of medication errors,420, 564, 565, 569-571 lower incidence
of AKI,90, 420, 539, 546, 564, 565, 572 and lower AKI severity.90, 420, 564, 565 One systematic review and
meta-analysis of 34 cohort studies or RCTs (n=19,298 participants) evaluating pharmacist
interventions for vancomycin management reported a higher rate of attaining drug target
concentration, improved SCr monitoring, a lower incidence of vancomycin-induced AKI, and
lower mortality associated with pharmacist involvement.539
Dedicating pharmacists to medication reconciliation and regular medication regimen
reviews can increase healthcare system costs; however, some studies have reported these
costs may be offset by lower drug costs resulting from dose modifications.573 In low-resource
hospital settings, where pharmacist services are unavailable, education and training of other
available healthcare professionals in drug and nephrotoxin stewardship is an alternative
(Table 32).

D

R

Medication review and reconciliation have been specifically suggested: i) at
ICU/hospital admission and discharge, ii) at time of AKI or AKD identification or change in
severity, and iii) when a patient’s clinical condition changes.574 The Work Group agrees with
practice points from Section 4.3 Polypharmacy and drug stewardship of the KDIGO 2024
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD and believes the
statements below apply to people with AKI and AKD:17
i.
ii.

iii.

iv.

Perform thorough medication review at transitions of care.
If medications are discontinued during an acute illness, communicate a clear
plan of when to restart the discontinued medications to the affected person and
healthcare professionals, and ensure documentation in the medical record.
If medications such as metformin, ACEi, ARBs, and SGLT2i are discontinued
as a precautionary measure to prevent complications, failure to restart these
medications after the event or procedure may lead to unintentional harm.
Educate and inform people with high risk of AKI regarding the expected
benefits and possible risks of medications.

208

D
R

AF
T

Table 32 | Description of pharmacist interventions and related outcomes for people with or at risk for AKI in various practice settings across the world
Reference
Population
Pharmacist interventions
Outcomes
Hospital setting
Goldstein SL et al. 2013,
Pediatrics outside the ICU at a hospital Facilitate monitoring of SCr with the
• Reduced AKI incidence and
2016, 2020420, 564, 565
in the U.S. A single center trial, a
patient care team for those at risk for
severity in multiple studies
follow up study and a multicenter study AKI (receiving 3 or more
nephrotoxins)
572
Ebah L et al. 2017
32 inpatient wards and 20 specialties in Prompt medication review with
• Drug reviews increased from
an institution in England
discontinuation of potentially
48% to 95% in this pre- and
nephrotoxic medications as part of a
post-intervention assessment
multicomponent team-based
• AKI incidence reduced
intervention
Stoops C et al. 201990
Neonates in the ICU at a hospital in the Facilitate monitoring of SCr with the
• Reduced nephrotoxin exposure,
U.S. (n=476 high exposure events)
patient care team for those at risk for
AKI incidence and severity
AKI (receiving 3 or more
nephrotoxins)
Kunming P et al. 2023539
Systematic review and meta-analysis of Pharmacist intervention was defined as
• Lower incidence of
34 cohort studies and/or randomized
a pharmacist, or a medical team led by
vancomycin-associated AKI:
controlled trials (n=19,298)
a pharmacist, taking measures to
7.3% for post- and 9.6% for
intervene in vancomycin treatment.
pre-intervention (OR: 0.52;
Pharmacist intervention measures
95% CI: 0.41–0.67, p
included: (i) recommendation to
<0.00001)
discontinue vancomycin and/or
• Post-intervention had lower
alternative anti-MRSA agents; (ii)
risk of mortality than prerecommendation of initial dose and/or
intervention participants (OR
dose adjustment; (iii) therapeutic drug
0.47; 95% CI: 0.31–0.72,
monitoring plan and/or follow-up plan
p=0.0004).
for future monitoring; and (iv)
development and implementation of
vancomycin dosing nomogram and
therapeutic drug monitoring guidelines.
Participants in control group did not
receive pharmacist intervention or were

209

Adults in an ICU in Turkey (n=150)

Hou J et al. 2023575

Adults with AKI caused by antibiotics
in an ICU in China (n=145)

AF
T

Polat EC et al. 2022546

retrospective control prior to
pharmacist intervention.
While participating in patient care
rounds, recommendations included
drug selection, drug administration
routes, drug dose adjustment, drugdrug interactions, drug-food or
interactions, drug side effect
management, and drug incompatibility
Dose adjustments, drug replacements,
and CRRT treatment

•

•

AKI incidence reduced

D
R

No difference in kidney
function outcomes and
infection control outcomes
between the pre- and postevaluation
AKI, acute kidney injury; CI, confidence interval; CRRT, continuous renal replacement therapy; ICU, intensive care unit; OR, odds ratio; SCr, serum
creatinine; U.S., United States

210

Practice Point 4.3.2: Clinical decision support systems (CDSS) can be an effective tool to
facilitate drug and nephrotoxin stewardship strategies in children and adults to prevent
drug-associated AKI or the development of adverse reactions from drugs excreted by
the kidney.

AF
T

CDSS can aid in identification of people at risk of adverse drug events, optimization
of medication management, recognition of drug interactions, and prompt kidney function
monitoring through rule-based alerts.420, 564, 565, 576, 577 CDSS may be useful in preventing
medication dosage errors of drugs excreted by the kidney by alerting to overdosed or
contraindicated dosages for people in hospital with a decreased GFR.578-580 Implementation of
an alert-based CDSS that focused on concurrent administration of ≥3 nephrotoxins pediatrics
in hospital has been shown to result in improved patient outcomes. Further, this CDSS
achieved a sustained impact on clinical practice over 3.5 years and remained effective when
scaled across multiple pediatric hospitals.420, 565 CDSS supporting clinical risk stratification
enables the early identification of people at risk for development or progression of AKI,
allowing for proactive monitoring and intervention. The effectiveness of CDSS may be more
effective when alerts are integrated into healthcare professional workflows at the time and
place of prescribing decisions, when actionable recommendations are included, and when
computer-based.581, 582
4.4 Biomarker characterization of drug-related AKI
Practice Point 4.4.1: Biomarkers of tubular damage are approved for monitoring of
drug-induced AKI.

D

R

Several of the kidney stress and damage biomarkers are detectable within hours after
drug-related AKI and may be used to detect AKI before the rise in SCr. The U.S. FDA has
qualified a composite of 6 biomarkers for monitoring of drug-induced kidney injury in earlyphase clinical trials. This panel, composed of KIM-1, NGAL, clusterin (CLU), cystatin C
(cys), N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase (NAG), and Osteopontin (OPN), is used to detect
kidney tubular injury when there is concern about the nephrotoxicity of a drug. This is
intended to help in the development of safer and more effective medicines by providing an
earlier indicator of kidney response to drug-induced injury than changes in SCr.
Practice Point 4.4.2: Biomarkers may be useful for differentiating mechanisms and
etiologies of drug-related kidney diseases in children and adults.
Biomarkers may aid in differentiating among mechanisms and etiologies of AKI
among people receiving drugs associated with AKI (Table 33), which may influence
management.241, 583, 584 Serum cystatin C can distinguish non-GFR related increases in SCr
(pseudo-AKI) due to the effects of a drug (Table 33) from true AKI because it is unaffected
by drug-induced changes in creatinine secretion. An increased SCr but normal cystatin C
indicates a drug-induced effect on creatinine generation or tubular secretion (pseudo-AKI),
whereas an increase in both SCr and cystatin C is consistent with AKI.585 Correct
differentiation may guide the decision whether to continue or discontinue suspected drugs.
211

Urine CXCL9 may offer a reliable, noninvasive biomarker for identification of
AIN.241 High urine CXCL9 levels strongly correlate with biopsy proven AIN. Urinary
CXCL9:creatinine values <14.2 ng/g could be used to rule out AIN with negative predictive
values exceeding 94% while values >58.9 ng/g could be used to rule in AIN. However further
validation and approval for clinical use is needed.

AF
T

Table 33 | Potential use of biomarkers to distinguish etiology of drug-related acute kidney
diseases
Biomarker
Use
Comment
Plasma cystatin C
Differentiate non-GFR related A normal cystatin C when SCr is
increases in serum creatinine
increased is consistent with non-GFR
(pseudo-AKI) due to a drug
related effects of a drug due to i) effects
from actual AKI
on tubular creatinine secretion (e.g.,
trimethoprim), ii) effects on analytic
measurement of creatinine, or iii)
effects on creatinine generation.
Urine chemokine C-X- Identifying AIN. Differentiate CXCL9: creatinine value<14.2 ng/g
C motif ligand 9
drug related AIN from other
could be used to rule out AIN,
(CXCL9)
etiologies
while >58.9 ng/g could be used to rule
in AIN
AIN, acute interstitial nephritis; AKI, acute kidney injury; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs; SCr, serum creatinine

R

4.5. Management of drugs eliminated by the kidneys
Practice Point 4.5.1: Dosing of drugs excreted by the kidneys should not be based on
creatinine clearance or glomerular filtration rate (GFR) estimated using equations that
assume a steady state of creatinine production and clearance in children and adults
children with developing or resolving AKI or AKD.

D

Practice Point 4.5.2: Trends in SCr and urine output should be used to guide dosing of
drugs excreted by the kidney. In adults with AKI, calculation of a KeGFR may be
useful when sufficient SCr measurements are available.
Ideal methods for measuring GFR use urinary clearance of exogenous compounds
such as inulin or iohexol but these approaches are not practical to guide drug dosing in
routine clinical practice due to costs and technical challenges. Measurement of urinary
creatinine clearance with timed urine collections is an option to estimate GFR but is limited
by overestimation of true GFR by 10%–20% due to tubular secretion of creatinine and
inaccuracies in timing of collections.
The Work Group agrees with the following practice point related to drug dosing from
the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD
and believes it also applies to people with AKI and AKD.

212

Practice Point 4.5.3: Consider and adapt drug dosing in people where GFR, non-GFR
determinants of the filtration markers, or volume of distribution are not in a steady
state.

AF
T

In the context of AKI, it is important to recognize that GFR estimating equations such
as the Cockcroft-Gault, MDRD, and CKD-EPI equations were developed and validated for
people with CKD and assume a steady state of SCr.586, 587 They will overestimate a person's
GFR when SCr is rising (potentially resulting in drug overdosing) and underestimate GFR
when SCr is falling (potentially resulting in drug underdosing). For people with AKI, it is
important to consider trends in SCr and urine output when dosing drugs excreted by the
kidney. Initial dosing may start with a standard dose based on a person's eGFR before the
AKI episode, or a dose that would be appropriate for severely abnormal kidney function,
depending on the clinical situation. A person who is anuric should be considered to have a
GFR <10 ml/min.588 Changes in SCr and urine output along with therapeutic drug monitoring
if available, can be used to guide and adjust subsequent doses.
KeGFR accounts for the rate of change in SCr over time, providing a more accurate
real-time estimate of GFR that can be used to guide drug doses with changing SCr values
accompanying AKI.589 In 1 study, use of a KeGFR equation resulted in changes in drug
dosing in approximately 20% of participants compared to non-kinetic eGFR equations.590 At
this time, no one equation can be endorsed over another and all have limitations.574, 587

D

R

Practice Point 4.5.4: Assess and adjust drug dosing in children and adults receiving
CRRT based on drug-, patient-, and RRT-related factors (Table 34).

213

Table 34 | Drug-, patient-, and RRT-related factors to consider when determining drug doses for people receiving CRRT
Drug-related
• Medications eliminated by the kidney with volume of distribution <0.7 l/kg and/or protein-binding <80% are likely
factors
to be removed with CRRT and may require supplemental dosing with CRRT use.

•
•
•
•
•
•

D
R

Patientrelated
factors

Molecular weight of a drug is an important consideration when using CRRT diffusive techniques compared to
convective techniques because the diffusion coefficient, or saturation coefficient (Sd or SA) is inversely
proportional to the molecular weight such that, as the SA decreases, the molecular weight increases. Conversely,
convective transport across modern membranes is independent of molecular weight in convective hemofiltration
techniques.591, 592
Most drugs have a molecular weight <2000 Daltons and are removed to some extent with newer high-flux and super
high-flux dialyzers that have a pore size between 10,000–30,000 (likely diffusion technique, as well)
Administering supplement doses for drugs with >30%–40% post-hemodialysis removal is suggested.
Optimal dosage regimens for medications eliminated by the kidney and nephrotoxic medications (e.g., digoxin,
vancomycin, aminoglycosides, and calcineurin inhibitors) can be achieved by performing therapeutic drug
monitoring in people who are critically ill receiving RRT.
For antibiotic dose adjustments during AKI and RRT, be mindful of pharmacokinetic target concentration
attainment and optimizing pharmacodynamic effects with consideration to the antibiotic concentration and time
dependent bactericidal effects.
Hypoalbuminemia affects drugs that are highly bound to albumin, by increasing free fraction of the drug leading to
increased clearance and volume of distribution.
Fluid resuscitation, and capillary leak increase the volume of distribution of hydrophilic drugs, for example in
people with sepsis. This may require a loading dose in the range of 25% more than usual.
People with significant urine output (e.g., >20 ml/hr or 500 ml/day), should have clearance from the residual urine
volume added to RRT clearance calculations to determine total drug clearance for the person.
Non-kidney drug clearance can be affected by RRT for AKI. Drugs eliminated by the liver and formed metabolites
may accumulate during AKI, while RRT can possibly increase CYP3A4 activity. Estimating non-kidney clearance
in people who are critically ill is challenging without assessing serum drug levels due to the various pathways
involved in drug metabolism and clearance.

AF
T

•

•
•

214

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Effluent flow rate determines drug clearance in CRRT given it is slower than the blood flow rate and more drug
removal occurs with faster effluent flow rates.593
If RRT is <25% of the patient’s clearance (sum of residual kidney and non-kidney), then RRT appears not to add
significantly to person’s drug elimination process.592
RRT modality affects drug clearance such that when a similar blood flow rate is used, drug elimination by RRT can
be ordered from the highest to lowest as follows: CVVHDF > CVVH > IHD. 591
For CRRT, clearance can be estimated by checking the run time and subtracting the down time.
Replacement fluid is commonly provided in convective techniques of RRT, either pre- or post-dilution modes. Predilution mode reduces drug clearance more than post-dilution by approximately 15%.591
Hemofilter lifespan can affect solute clearance (i.e., older filters provide less clearance).
Membrane types affect adsorption and adsorption is inversely correlated to effluent flow rate. 591, 594, 595
Drug removal estimates for IHD are not equivalent to CRRT. When suing drug removal estimates from primary or
secondary sources, it is important to confirm that the RRT modality, technique, and settings are the same as the
patient scenario being evaluated.

AF
T

RRT-related
factors*

D
R

*RRT related factors do not apply to children due to the size of the extracorporeal volume. AKI, acute kidney injury; CRRT, continuous renal replacement
therapy; CVVH, continuous venovenous hemofiltration; CVVHD, continuous venovenous hemodialysis; CVVHDF, continuous venovenous
hemodiafiltration, IHD, intermittent hemodialysis, PIRRT, prolonged intermittent renal replacement therapy; RRT, renal replacement therapy

215

4.6. AKI following other nephrotoxic exposures
Practice Point 4.6.1: In children and adults presenting with community-acquired AKI,
perform a thorough social, occupational, and demographic history to understand
potential exposures to pesticides and environmental exposures as a possible cause of
AKI.

AF
T

Each year, millions of pounds of pesticides are used in agriculture to manage a variety
of threats to crops. These chemicals present potential occupational exposure risks that
healthcare professionals should be aware of, particularly in relation to environmental toxicity
to the kidney. It is known that occupational exposure, even for short durations, can increase
the incidence of AKI.596, 597 Also, residential exposure for people living close to agricultural
lands can be a concern for adverse effects.598, 599 The incidence of AKI is increasing in
younger adults in low-to-middle resource settings due to accidental and intentional
organophosphate poisoning.600 Awareness by healthcare professionals can promote detection
of pesticide-associated AKI, and educate people about occupational risks and reduce
exposures.
Practice Point 4.6.2: Determine and limit the use of natural products that have the
potential to contribute to AKI and AKD through patient-centered discussions.

R

Over 80% of the population in low- and middle-resource settings use herbal and
traditional medicines because of cultural beliefs, economic considerations, and
accessibility.601 Regulations surrounding the approval of natural products for public
consumption are less stringent than prescription medications, and adverse events often go
unreported. The true incidence of AKI attributable to natural products is unknown. There
have been several case reports and reviews suggesting a causation between several natural
products presented in Table 35.

D

Table 35 | Examples of nephrotoxicity associated with natural products602
Common
Scientific (Latin) name
Kidney manifestations/mechanism
(English) name
Interstitial nephritis/fibrosis, Tubular
Aristolochia species
Aristolochic
atrophy/defect, Fanconi syndrome, urothelial
malignancies
AKI secondary to seizure-induced
Artemisia absinthium
Wormwood oil
rhabdomyolysis, acute tubular injury
Atractylis gummifera
Glue thistle
Acute tubular injury
Acute tubular injury, oxalate nephropathy,
Averrhoa carambola
Starfruit
nephrolithiasis, obstructive nephropathy
Proximal and distal renal tubular acidosis,
Cassia angustifolia
Senna fruit
diabetes insipidus
Type 1 renal tubular acidosis with severe
Cleistanthus collinus
Oduvan
hypokalemia
Crataegus orientalis
Hawthorne
AIN, AKI
Dioscorea quinqueloba
Yam
Biopsy-proven AIN, acute tubular injury
or quartiniana

216

Scientific (Latin) name

Common
(English) name

Kidney manifestations/mechanism

Stones of ephedrine and ephedrine metabolites,
AKI secondary to rhabdomyolysis
Euphorbia paralias
Euphorbia
AKI
AKI secondary to hypokalemia-induced
Glycyrrhiza glabra
Licorice
rhabdomyolysis, Fanconi’s tubulopathy
Hedeoma pulegioides
Pennyroyal
Acute tubular injury, Hepatorenal syndrome
Larrea tridentata
Chappara
Kidney cysts, renal cell carcinoma
Thevetia peruviana
Yellow oleander
Acute tubular injury, hepatorenal syndrome
Tribulus terrestris
Puncturevine
Acute tubular injury, AIN not excluded
Uncaria tomentosa
Cat’s claw
Acute interstitial nephritis
Vaccinium macrocarpon Cranberry
Nephrolithiasis
Abbreviations: AKI, acute kidney injury; AIN, acute interstitial nephritis
Ephedra species

Ma-huang

AF
T

4.7. Contrast-associated AKI (CA-AKI): Recognition
Practice Point 4.7.1: Consider the differential diagnosis of post-contrast AKI, which
may have causes other than contrast exposure.
Contrast-associated AKI (CA-AKI) refers to AKI following parenteral administration
of iodinated radiocontrast media. The reported incidence of CA-AKI has varied in the
literature with use of different definitions, with some reviews reporting it as the third most
common cause of AKI in hospitalized adults. The attribution of contrast exposure to AKI
continues to be a source of debate; however, CA-AKI has been consistently associated with
adverse short- and long-term outcomes.

D

R

The Work Group agrees with the suggestion from Section 4.4 of the KDIGO 2024
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD that the term
“contrast-associated AKI” be used to recognize the broader differential diagnosis for the
etiology of AKI in many such cases, which may or may not be solely attributable to
contrast.17 The presumption that all AKI following contrast administration is CA-AKI has led
to a lack of specificity in case definitions and associated epidemiology; indeed, some have
questioned the existence and clinical importance of CA-AKI.603 Nonetheless, in 2023, the
American College of Radiology (ACR) Contrast Manual stated the position of the ACR
Committee on Drugs and Contrast Media that CA-AKI is a real, albeit rare, entity.604 The
Work Group concurred with this statement while recognizing that CA-AKI includes other
etiologies of AKI following radiocontrast exposure, including multifactorial causes
(combined with radiocontrast).
4.8. Contrast-associated AKI: Risk assessment
Practice Point 4.8.1: Use validated tools to assess the risk of AKI in adults receiving
intra-arterial radiocontrast for cardiac procedures.
The Work Group endorses Practice Point 4.4.1 from the KDIGO 2024 Clinical
Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD to assess the risk of CA-AKI
with intra-arterial contrast for cardiac procedures using validated tools.17 Many models
217

include patient-related risk factors for CA-AKI in addition to eGFR, and these models have
been validated for estimating risk in people with or without CKD.

AF
T

The reported risk of CA-AKI is higher with procedures involving intra-arterial
administration compared with intravenous administration of radiocontrast. This difference in
risk may be due to diversities in patient populations or to variations in the nephrotoxicity of
intra-arterial delivery of contrast material. Commonly reported patient-related risk factors for
CA-AKI are age, baseline kidney function, medical history (diabetes, cardiovascular diseases,
and heart failure), presenting with acute coronary syndrome, and cardiac function (New York
Heart Association Class, left ventricular ejection fraction, and Killip class). 605 Risk also
varies with procedural factors, with highest risk associated with interventional (rather than
diagnostic) coronary angiography (i.e., percutaneous coronary interventions with balloon
angioplasty ± coronary stent placement) for acute myocardial infarction (MI). In addition to
intra-arterial dye administration and arterial instrumentation, this may relate to the higher
volume of contrast used in interventional procedures and hemodynamic instability associated
with the clinical situation. Other procedure-related risk factors include the osmolarity and
volume of dye used (including repeated studies).

D

R

There are several comprehensive systematic reviews of validated risk scores that can
be used to predict the risk of CA-AKI following coronary angiography (Table 36).605-607
Validated models are available to predict AKI defined by KDIGO SCr criteria, as well as to
predict RRT.606 Newer models have generally demonstrated better calibration in more recent
validation studies.607 Most recently, Feng and colleagues conducted a systematic review of
the published scores to predict CA-AKI after coronary angiography;605 their analysis of 45
studies found a pooled C-statistic of 0.83 (95% CI: 0.82–0.84), with pooled sensitivity of
0.74 (95% CI: 0.70–0.78) and pooled specificity of 0.78 (95% CI: 0.75–0.82), with
substantial heterogeneity in discrimination between prediction model studies. Notably, there
has been no meaningful improvement in estimates of model discrimination despite
publication of new models. The variables that have been repeatedly included in different
prediction models are listed in Table 36.

218

D
R

AF
T

Table 36 | Predictive variables in included prediction models
Grouping variables
Total occurrence, Predictive variables
No. (%)a
Baseline kidney function
56 (14.1)
CKD, eGFR, CCR, serum creatinine, cystatin C, and serum BUN
Past medical history
50 (12.6)
Prior cardiac shock, prior cardiac arrest, prior MI, prior CVD, prior heart
Age
37 (9.3)
Age
CAD presentation
33 (8.3)
AMI, PCI status, ACS subtype, PCI indication, CAD presentation, multivessel PCI, emergency
procedure, operation, and time to reperfusion
Cardiac function
22 (5.5)
NYHA class, LVEF, and Killip class
Blood pressure
20 (5.0)
SBP, hypotension, hypertension, and shock
Anemia
17 (4.3)
Anemia
CBC indices
15 (3.8)
SII, WBC count, neutrophil percentage, platelet count, RDW, NLR, lymphocyte count, and P-LCR
Contrast medium volume
15 (3.8)
Contrast medium volume
Cardiac biomarker
14 (3.5)
CK-MB, troponin I, myoglobin, and NT-pro-BNP
Liver function indices
12 (3.0)
Serum albumin, serum total bilirubin, LDH, and total protein
IABP
12 (3.0)
IABP
Inflammation biomarkers
12 (3.0)
Procalcitonin, Interleukin-18, and hsCRP
Blood lipid indices
11 (2.8)
Triglyceride, LDL-C, HDL-C, total cholesterol, and triglyceride-glucose index
Sex
8 (2.0)
Sex
Weight
7 (1.8)
Weight
Drug use
7 (1.8)
Loop diuretics use, β-blocker, antimicrobial drugs, and metformin use
Blood glucose
6 (1.5)
Blood glucose and HbA1C
Heart rate
5 (1.3)
Heart rate
Other
38 (9.6)
Height, uric acid, big ET-1, soluble klotho, KIM-1, osteopontin, CD5 antigen-like, free
triiodothyronine, CHA2DS2-VASc score, AGEF score, Mehran score, serum sodium, serum
calcium, serum potassium, fibrinogen-to-albumin ratio, fibrinogen, AT-III, INR, maximum AAA
diameter, urinary system contrast blush grade, kidney PI, proteinuria, years since drinking, and
admission source
AAA, abdominal aortic artery; ACS, acute coronary syndrome; AGEF, age, estimated glomerular filtration rate and ejection fraction; AMI, acute
myocardial infarction; AT-III, antithrombin III; BNP, brain natriuretic peptide; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CAD, coronary artery disease; CBC, complete
blood count; CCR, creatinine clearance rate; CHA2DS2-VASc, congestive heart failure, hypertension, age ≥75 years, diabetes, prior stroke/transient
ischemic attack–vascular disease, age 65–74 years, sex category; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CK-MB, creatine kinase-MB; CVD, cardiovascular
disease; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; ET-1, endothelin-1; HbA1c, hemoglobin A1c; HDL-C, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol; hsCRP,
highly sensitive C reaction protein; IABP, intra-aortic balloon pump; INR, international normalized ratio; KIM-1, Kidney injury molecule-1; LDH,
219

D
R

AF
T

lactate dehydrogenase; LDL-C, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; MI, myocardial infarction; NLR, neutrophilto-lymphocyte ratio; NT-pro-BNP, N-terminal pro–B-type natriuretic peptide; NYHA, New York Heart Association; PCI, percutaneous coronary
intervention; PI, peaking intensity; P-LCR, platelet large cell ratio; PVD, peripheral vascular disease; RDW, red blood cell distribution width; SBP,
systolic blood pressure; SII, systemic immune-inflammatory index; WBC, white blood cell. aNumbers in parentheses represent percentages of each
combined variable in the total occurrence of predictive variables. Reproduced from Feng et al. 2025.605

220

Practice Point 4.8.2: Assess children and adults being considered for intravenous
radiocontrast administration for risk factors for contrast-associated AKI, and in
particular screen for preexisting impairment of kidney function.

AF
T

The KDIGO 2012 Clinical Practice Guideline for AKI suggested assessment of the
risk of CA-AKI, and specifically screening for “pre-existing impairment of kidney function”
in all people for whom a procedure requiring intravascular (intra-arterial or intravenous)
radiocontrast is being considered.608 The Work Group continues to support the assessment of
risk for CA-AKI in all people being considered for intravascular contrast. However,
intravenous contrast administration for computed tomography (CT) scans generally has
lower risks for CA-AKI than intra-arterial administration for coronary angiography for
several reasons. Cardiac angiography differs from intravenous contrast medium
administration in 4 major ways: 1) the injection is intra-arterial and suprarenal instead of
through a peripheral vein, 2) the injection requires a catheter which can dislodge
atheroemboli, 3) the contrast medium dose to the kidneys will be more abruptly delivered
and concentrated resulting in greater “first-pass” exposure, and 4) people undergoing
coronary angiography may have other chronic comorbidities and acute insults (e.g., acute
ventricular dysfunction during MI) that predispose to the development of CA-AKI.
Accordingly, risk estimates from models developed to predict the risk of CA-AKI following
coronary procedures can be inaccurate for people receiving intravenous radiocontrast.

D

R

Multiple current published guidelines for risk assessment for CA-AKI following
intravenous radiocontrast administration in adults identify kidney function (i.e., reduced
eGFR in CKD or presence of AKI), along with some other clinical variables as important risk
factors. The 2020 joint Consensus statement from the ACR and National Kidney Foundation
(NKF) defined risk factors for CA-AKI following intravenous contrast as eGFR<30 ml/min
per 1.73 m2 or AKI, or eGFR 30–44 ml/min per 1.73 m2 with multiple risk factors;609 this
criteria was also included part of the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the
Evaluation and Management of CKD.17
The KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of
CKD listed commonly accepted risk factors for CA-AKI in 2 broad categories,17, 610
including abnormal kidney function (CKD or AKI), but also a variety of other patient-related
and procedure-related risk factors (Table 37). Among published reports of risk factors for
CA-AKI in adults following CT scans, CKD was the major risk factor, particularly CKD
with cancer (CKD G4–G5: OR: 3.76; CKD G3b: OR 1.93) and CKD G3b–G4 without
cancer (OR: 1.42–1.9; CKD G5: 1.45; NS). Other significant risk factors included shock
(OR: 2.15), and congestive heart failure (CHF) or proteinuria with cancer (OR: 1.7).611, 612

221

Table 37 | Risk factors for CA-AKI in adults
Patient-associated risk factors
Procedure-associated risk factors
Reduced GFR, acute or chronic in adultsa
High-osmolar contrast
Diabetes mellitusb
Large volume of contrast
Reduced intravascular volume
Serial contrast procedure
Concomitant nephrotoxic medications
Intra-arterial procedures
a
Defined as estimated glomerular filtration rate <45 ml/min per 1.73 m2 with other risk factors or
eGFR <30 ml/min per 1.73 m2. bAugments risk in people with underlying kidney function
impairment. CA-AKI, contrast-associated acute kidney injury; GFR, glomerular filtration rate.
Reproduced from Cashion W, Weisbord SD 2022.610

AF
T

4.9. Contrast-associated AKI: Prevention
4.9.1. Choice of imaging technique
Practice Point 4.9.1.1: Following a risk assessment, the decision to administer
intravascular contrast for a diagnostic or interventional procedure should be made
weighing the risks versus benefits of the procedure. Where the perceived benefit
exceeds the risk, contrast procedures should not be deferred or delayed. However, when
possible, alternative imaging methods should be used for people with or at high risk of
contrast-associated AKI (CA-AKI) (Figure 12).

R

An assessment of risks versus benefits is important with all diagnostic and
interventional procedures involving radiocontrast administration. It is desirable to avoid
iodinated contrast media in people with or at high risk of AKI if adequate diagnostic tests or
therapeutic interventions can be obtained without contrast administration. However,
procedures involving the administration of contrast may be necessary for the management of
many clinical syndromes. When selecting imaging methods, it is important to evaluate the
potential impact of limiting or postponing access to diagnostic and therapeutic contrast
imaging procedures.

D

This practice point aligns with Practice Point 4.4.1 from the KDIGO 2024 Clinical
Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD, approaching the decision
for contrast administration on an individualized basis, in which the risk of CA-AKI following
administration of radiocontrast should be balanced against the risk of inadequate imaging and
therapy following alternative imaging tests.17

222

AF
T

Figure 12 | Approach to risk assessment for CA-AKI with diagnostic or interventional
contrast imaging procedures. CA-AKI, contrast-associated acute kidney injury

R

Practice Point 4.9.1.2: Iso-osmolar or low-osmolar iodinated contrast media may be
used in children and adults at risk of CA-AKI (1B).

D

High-osmolar contrast agents are no longer used for intravascular imaging in clinical
radiology and have been replaced globally by safer, more tolerable low-osmolar and isoosmolar alternatives with a lower risk of AKI. Whether iso-osmolar agents (~290 mOsm/kg)
have a lower risk of AKI than low-osmolar agents (322–900 mOsm/kg) remains uncertain. A
meta-analysis of 25 RCTs comparing the risk of AKI between iso- and low-osmolar agents
reported a pooled RR of 0.80 (95% CI: 0.61–1.04). Subgroup analyses of trials restricted to
people with abnormal kidney function receiving intra-arterial contrast administration
suggested potential for differences between specific low-osmolar versus iso-osmolar agents.
The risk of AKI was greater for the low-osmolar agent iohexol than for the iso-osmolar agent
iodixanol (RR: 0.38; 95% CI: 0.21–0.68), while there was no difference between iodixanol
and other (non-iohexol) low-osmolar agents (RR: 0.95; 95% CI: 0.50–1.78). A subsequent
meta-analysis of 10 RCTs restricted to people with CKD reported no difference in AKI with
iso-osmolar compared to low-osmolar agents (RR: 0.72; 95% CI: 0.50–1.04). The effect
estimate was attenuated when the analysis was restricted to large RCTs with more than 250
participants, used as a surrogate of trial quality (RR: 0.93; 95% CI: 0.66–1.30).
223

The existing evidence base therefore has not established a benefit to use of isoosmolar over low-osmolar agents. Accordingly, the choice between low-osmolar or isoosmolar contrast agents may depend on availability and cost, particularly in lower- and
lower-to-middle- resource settings. It is appropriate to use the least nephrotoxic agent
available for people at increased risk of CA-AKI. This practice is consistent with statements
published by the ACR,604 Canadian Association of Radiology,613 and European Society of
Urogenital Radiology.614
Practice Point 4.9.1.3: For children and adults at high risk of CA-AKI, use the lowest
possible dose of intravascular radiocontrast to achieve adequate imaging.

D

R

AF
T

Contrast dose is associated with risk of CA-AKI; however, this relationship is
complex and modified by patient and procedural factors. While risk generally increases with
dose, small increases in contrast volume may lead to disproportionate increases in AKI risk
in high-risk people, while even moderate-to-high contrast volumes may not cause AKI in
low-risk people (Figure 13). Furthermore, recent studies illustrate that the relationship
between contrast dose and CA-AKI is non-linear across the range of contrast volumes and
heterogeneous according to a patient’s preprocedural risk. A variety of procedural strategies
can minimize contrast administration, including imaging and guidance technologies (e.g.,
intravascular ultrasound on optical coherence tomography), fluoroscopy optimization,
injection techniques, and catheter selection. Automated contrast injectors can lower contrast
volumes but the effect depends heavily on how they are used with a need for training and
optimization of settings.615 Procedural planning and staging of procedures (limiting the
extent of contrast used in a single session) can further help to limit the dose of contrast
exposure.

Figure 13 | Prediction of risks of AKI as a function of contrast volume and
preprocedural AKI risk in percutaneous coronary intervention. Risks of absolute
increase in creatinine were calculated for patients with preprocedural AKI risks of 5%, 45%,
and 80%. Odds ratios (ORs) and absolute risk differences (RDs) of AKI risks are given for
increases in contrast volume from 100 to 300 ml, from 400 to 600 ml, and from 700 to 900
224

ml. The colored bands indicate 95% CIs. To convert creatinine to micromoles per liter,
multiply by 88.4.616 AKI, acute kidney injury

AF
T

Several calculations and multivariable modeling approaches have been developed to
estimate the risk of CA-AKI.617, 618 Estimation of a safe contrast limit is a strategy to prevent
excessive exposure to contrast media. These limits are often calculated based on patientspecific parameters, such as preprocedural kidney function in addition to other patient risk
factors, and are intended to give individualized, actional estimates of safe contrast volume
dose for planning procedures (Table 38). The Contrast Reducing Injury Sustained by Kidneys
(RISK) trial, a large, multicenter, stepped-wedge, cluster RCT in people undergoing coronary
angiography and intervention, demonstrated that a multimodality approach providing CDSS
accompanied by audit and feedback on contrast volume significantly reduced the incidence
of CA-AKI.153 Secondary outcomes included a significant reduction in the contrast dose
administration, suggesting this may have mediated the reduction in AKI incidence observed.
Subsequent trials confirmed that multimodality interventions that incorporate strategies to
reduce contrast dye dosing along with intravenous hydration strategies can be implemented
in health systems successfully and achieve a lower incidence of CA-AKI.619

D

R

Table 38 | Examples of strategies to estimate contrast volume doses with lower risk of CA-AKI
Strategy
Calculation
Targets and CA-AKI risk
Calculation MACD
MACD = 3 × eGFR in ml/min MACD 1.0–1.5: OR 1.60; 95% CI:
per 1.73 m²
1.29–1.97,
MACD 1.5–2.0: OR: 2.02; 95%CI
1.45–2.81
MACD >2.0: OR: 2.94; 95% CI
1.93–4-48620
Monitoring of CV/CrCl
CV/CrCl
CV/CrCl of >3.7: OR: 3.84; 95% CI:
intraprocedurally
2.0–7.3)621
Decision support tools
Multivariable predictive
Predictive models for the association
using multivariable
models can be used to obtain
of contrast volume with the risk of
equations to estimate
estimates of CA-AKI
AKI demonstrate a non-linear
individualized safe
according to contrast volume
association along the spectrum of
contrast limits
and preprocedural risk.
contrast volume and variation
according to patient preprocedural
Safe contrast limits can be
AKI risk.616, 618, 622 These models
calculated from the contrast
have been implemented in EHRs to
term in the model and use to
give personalized decision support to
target specific (e.g., 10%)
guide contrast dosing during
relative risk reductions
interventional procedures.153
AKI, acute kidney injury; CA-AKI, contrast-associated acute kidney injury; CV, contrast volume; CrCl,
creatinine clearance; EHR, electronic health record; MACD, maximum allowable contrast dose

4.9.2. Contrast-associated AKI Prevention: Fluid administration
Practice Point 4.9.2.1: For children and adults at high risk of CA-AKI, incorporate
volume status assessment into intravenous hydration management strategies to reduce
the risk of AKI.

225

Volume depletion is a risk factor for CA-AKI. Accordingly, the prophylactic
administration of intravenous crystalloids to avoid hypovolemia in people at high risk of CAAKI has been a standard practice for decades. However, the clinical significance of small
acute changes in SCr that define CA-AKI has been questioned in recent years. This has led to
reassessment of the benefits versus harms of empiric prophylactic volume expansion to
prevent CA-AKI, even in higher risk groups. Furthermore, the growing literature
demonstrating that volume overload and congestion can cause or worsen AKI (in addition to
potentially causing acute pulmonary edema) has also raised awareness of the potential
importance of personalized fluid management in this setting. Recent evidence suggests that
strategies that provide more precise assessment of volume status may reduce the incidence of
CA-AKI by individualizing fluid management.

AF
T

In standard clinical practice, the assessment of volume status uses medical history,
physical examination, and clinically available tests (including B-type natriuretic peptide,
chest x-ray) to determine if volume overload is present, in which case prophylactic hydration
may be contraindicated. Multiple trials concerning the approach to volume assessment and
fluid management to reduce the risk of CA-AKI have been conducted recently. Findings
suggest the use of hemodynamic monitoring or volume assessment to guide fluid
administration for CA-AKI prophylaxis may reduce CA-AKI incidence, including with both
invasive monitoring623, 624 and noninvasive assessment methods.625, 626

D

R

A systematic review and network meta-analysis examined the effects of different
hydration strategies for the prevention of CA-AKI. From analysis of 60 eligible RCTs,
hemodynamic-guided hydration (OR: 0.41; 95% CI: 0.18–0.93), and device-guided matched
hydration with forced diuresis guided by urine flow rate (UFR) (OR: 0.32; 95% CI: 0.14–0.7)
significantly reduced the incidence of CA-AKI.625 A subsequent meta-analysis by Cossette et
al. included 13 RCTs of participants undergoing coronary angiography or percutaneous
coronary intervention (PCI) evaluating tailored intravenous hydration strategies using either
hemodynamic monitoring or UFR replacement to guide crystalloid administration. There
were significant reductions in incidence of CA-AKI (RR: 0.56; 95% CI: 0.46–0.69,
P<0.00001), and of major adverse cardiac events (MACE) (RR: 0.57; 95% CI: 0.42–0.78,
P=0.0005) with tailored compared to non-tailored intravenous hydration.627 This recent
evidence suggests that the efficacy and safety of intravenous crystalloid administration for
CA-AKI may be improved when guided by these tailored approaches.
Hemodynamic-guided hydration may be achieved using invasive approaches,
including left ventricular end diastolic pressure (LVEDP) measurement during cardiac
catheterization623 or continuous central venous pressure monitoring624 or noninvasive
approaches, including bioimpedance (Table 39).626 Reports of the effects of matched
hydration to urine output with forced diuresis are from studies completed using a specific
medical device. This strategy may be challenging to implement without such a device.
Prophylactic diuretic administration is not recommended to prevent CA-AKI, and caution is
226

warranted if attempting to implement these strategies without an established protocol or
device.

R

AF
T

Table 39 | Hydration strategies to prevent CA-AKI
Hydration
Measurement
Intravenous fluid administration protocol
strategy
Hemodynamic
Left ventricular
0.9% sodium chloride i.v. bolus infusion at 3 ml/kg for 1 h
guided
end diastolic
before the procedure, then rate adjusted according to
pressure
LVEDP: 5 ml/kg/h for LVEDP <13 mm Hg, 3 ml/kg/h for
(LVEDP)
LVEDP 13–18 mm Hg, and 1.5 ml/kg/h for LVEDP >18
mm Hg for 4 h after procedure623
Central venous
0.9% sodium chloride i.v. adjusted hourly according to
pressure (CVP)
CVP: 3 ml/kg/h for CVP <6 cm H2O, 1.5 ml/kg/h for CVP
6–12 cm H2O), and 1 ml/kg/h for CVP >12 cm H2O for 6
hours pre-procedure and 12 hours post-procedure624
Bioimpedence
0.9% sodium chloride at 2 ml/kg/h for 12 h before and after
vector analysis
the procedure for people with a low BIVA level (<315
(BIVA)
Ohm/m for males, <380 Ohm/m for females) for 12 h
before and after the procedure) or double volume saline (2
ml/kg/h). The infusion rate was halved for people with an
ejection fraction <40%.626
Device guided
Matched
0.9% sodium chloride i.v. bolus of 250 ml over 30 min
hydration with
followed by an i.v. furosemide bolus of 0.5 mg/kg
forced diuresis
preprocedure. Injection of contrast media deferred until
using urine
urine flow rate >300 ml/h. Matched hydration to urine
output from
output throughout procedure and up to 4 h after the
Foley catheter
procedure. Matched hydration during and up to 4 hours
post-procedure achieved by initial i.v. infusion 200 ml/h,
followed by adjustment of infusion rate to match the urine
output after every 5 min.628
CA-AKI, contrast-associated acute kidney injury; i.v. intravenous

D

Recommendation 4.9.2.1: For adults at high risk of AKI without fluid overload
undergoing intravascular iodinated contrast-based procedures, we recommend
prophylactic periprocedural volume expansion with 0.9% saline over hypotonic
solutions (e.g., 0.45% saline), sodium bicarbonate, or no intravenous hydration (1B).
This recommendation places a high value on reducing the risk of CA-AKI, specifically when
patient- or procedure-associated risk factors or risk prediction models identify people as
being at high risk of CA-AKI. This recommendation is supported by systematic reviews that
demonstrate a lower incidence of CA-AKI among adults who received intravenous isotonic
crystalloids compared to no hydration, particularly among high-risk adults receiving
coronary procedures. Sodium bicarbonate did not reduce the incidence of CA-AKI compared
to 0.9% saline in high quality trials. The large landmark Prevention of Serious Adverse
Events Following Angiography (PRESERVE) trial was conducted in adults undergoing
coronary angiography with intra-arterial contrast and showed no difference in a composite
of death, dialysis, or persistent abnormal kidney function at 90 days between the 0.9% saline
versus bicarbonate treated cohort.629 Similarly, there was no difference in the largest trial in
227

critically ill participants receiving intravenous contrast for CT scanning or arteriography.630
This recommendation places a lower emphasis on the additional resource use and costs of
providing intravenous hydration before and after contrast-imaging procedures.

AF
T

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
For this guideline, we performed an updated systematic review and meta-analyses of
RCTs that compared various forms of hydration, including no hydration for CA-AKI
prevention. These were built on a systematic review of hydration versus no hydration and a
network meta-analysis of different fluids.625, 631 The majority of studies were conducted in
participants undergoing coronary angiography. There is less evidence regarding the risk of
AKI in people undergoing intravascular contrast imaging. The certainty of evidence was
downgraded due to some methodological issues with the trials and a very imprecise effect
estimate.

D

R

We identified 7 RCTs that compared intravenous crystalloids versus no hydration,
which included 3258 participants, that found consistent evidence of a reduction in CA-AKI
incidence with intravenous crystalloid hydration (RR: 0.64; 95% CI: 0.54–0.76)
(Supplementary Table S71).625, 631, 632 Across 6 of the RCTs with 2475 participants, mortality
was also lower with intravenous hydration (RR: 0.57; 95% CI: 0.33–0.98), but the estimate
for risk of RRT was imprecise (across 3 RCTs with RRT events). Included in the metaanalyses, the A MAastricht Contrast-Induced Nephropathy Guideline (AMACING) trial was
a noninferiority RCT that compared pre- and post- procedure hydration with intravenous
0.9% saline versus no hydration in 660 adults with an eGFR between 30–59 ml/min per 1.73
m2 receiving elective intra-arterial (48%) or intravenous (52%) contrast.633 The AMACING
trial concluded noninferiority of no hydration compared to intravenous hydration in
preventing CA-AKI and found that hydration increased costs in this population. However,
this noninferiority trial recruited fewer participants than originally planned and had a lower
incidence of CA-AKI (2.6%) than projected. Trials incorporated in our systematic review
and others included higher risk participants undergoing coronary intervention with an
average incidence of CA-AKI of 14% across all studies. Given the heterogenous findings
between the lower risk cohort included in the AMACING trial compared with the other trials
conducted in high-risk groups receiving coronary intervention, it was the Work Group view
that the recommendation for intravenous crystalloids for CA-AKI prophylaxis should be
applied to people deemed at high risk of CA-AKI to warrant preventive intervention.
The optimal intravenous fluid type for CA-AKI prevention remains uncertain due a
lack of direct comparisons. No direct trial comparisons between oral hydration versus no
hydration or 0.45% sodium chloride versus no hydration were available; however, in indirect
comparisons by network meta-analysis, neither oral hydration nor 0.45% saline solution
significantly reduced CA-AKI compared to no hydration (Supplementary Tables S72 and
S73).625 In contrast, the network meta-analysis found lower risks of CA-AKI with
228

intravenous 0.9% saline (2 trials with direct comparisons) and sodium bicarbonate (1 direct
trial) versus intravenous 0.45% saline (Supplementary Tables S74 and S75).625 Thus, for
people identified at high risk of CA-AKI warranting periprocedural hydration, the Work
Group deemed that these findings supported the practice of using intravenous isotonic
crystalloid solutions in preference to hypotonic intravenous solutions or oral hydration.

R

AF
T

Well-conducted RCTs, including the PRESERVE trial,634 have demonstrated no
superiority of sodium bicarbonate over 0.9% saline in preventing CA-AKI or improving
kidney outcomes within 90 days (Supplementary Table S76).615, 629, 630, 635-648 Across low- or
moderate risk of bias RCTs (those without serious limitations) there is no evidence of
differences in incident AKI (RR: 0.99; 95% CI: 0.88–1.13; 18 RCTs, N=10.080) or of need
for RRT (RR: 1.21; 95% CI: 0.81–1.82; 16 RCTs, N=9175); although, the estimate for RRT
was imprecise due to the low incidence of RRT (approximately 1.0%). As has been
previously noted, high risk of bias studies favored sodium bicarbonate over 0.9% saline to
prevent incident AKI.649, 650 However, in the largest RCT, the landmark PRESERVE trial
conducted in 5177 participants with CKD G3–G4 undergoing arteriography, sodium
bicarbonate versus 0.9% saline did not reduce the primary endpoint of a composite of death,
need for dialysis, or a persistent SCr increase of ≥50% at 90 days, nor reduce the incidence of
CA-AKI.629 Similarly, in the multicenter HYDRAREA trial involving critically ill
participants, Valette et al. found that isotonic sodium bicarbonate did not reduce CA-AKI
incidence following contrast administration compared to 0.9% saline.630 Both solutions are
generally safe, but sodium bicarbonate may carry a slightly higher risk of electrolyte
disturbances, such as hypokalemia, and is more prone to compounding errors from manual
preparation. Given similar effectiveness in studies without high risk of bias and a slightly
more favorable safety and cost profile, 0.9% saline is often preferred in clinical practice
unless specific patient factors, such as metabolic acidosis, suggest a potential advantage with
administration of bicarbonate.

D

The optimal fluid volume and timing of administration for prevention of CA-AKI
remain uncertain. In the cluster randomized Contrast RISK trial of multimodal intervention
for CA-AKI prevention in coronary angiography and intervention, the hydration approach
guided by LVEDP promoted use of isotonic 0.9% saline or sodium bicarbonate at 3 ml/kg for
1 h before the procedure followed by an LVEDP-guided rate during and for 4 hours postprocedure.153 This approach resulted in a mean volume of approximately 850 ml of
prophylactic isotonic crystalloid administration, and, in concert with a reduction in contrast
dose, significantly reduced the incidence of CA-AKI without increasing the risk of MACE,
including heart failure. A secondary analysis of intravenous crystalloid (isotonic 0.9% saline
or sodium bicarbonate) administered with angiography in the PRESERVE trial suggested
that a total of 1 l of crystalloid delivered over 1 hour pre-contrast to 6 hours post-contrast
administration was associated with a similar risk of death, dialysis, or persistent abnormal
kidney function at 90 days to larger volumes administered over longer periods.651

229

The harms of fluid administration can include complications from volume overload
such as pulmonary edema if excessive fluids are administered, which may occur in people
with heart failure or compromised cardiac function. Thus, caution is warranted applying this
recommendation to people with or at high risk of volume overload and people with a low risk
of CA-AKI who may not benefit.
Certainty of evidence
There is high certainty of evidence that prophylactic volume expansion with
intravenous isotonic crystalloid solution (versus no hydration) prior to intravascular contrast
reduces the risk of incident AKI, RRT, and mortality in adults at increased risk of AKI. 625, 631,
632 Trials in children are lacking.

AF
T

There is very low certainty of evidence regarding prophylactic volume expansion
with either oral hydration or intravenous 0.45% saline versus no hydration. No RCTs have
been found that directly compared either these interventions to no hydration. Conclusions are
based on a network meta-analysis of RCTs of adults at receiving intravascular contrast; the
network meta-analysis evaluated only incident AKI.625
There is low certainty of evidence that prophylactic volume expansion with
intravenous isotonic (0.9%) saline reduces the risk of incident AKI compared with
intravenous hypotonic (0.45%) saline in adults.625 The certainty of evidence was downgraded
for some methodological limitations and imprecision (since the summary estimate was near,
but not statistically significant).

D

R

There is low certainty of evidence that prophylactic volume expansion with
intravenous sodium bicarbonate reduces the risk of incident AKI compared with intravenous
hypotonic (0.45%) saline in adults.625 The certainty of evidence was downgraded for some
methodological limitations and sparseness of data. A single study directly compared the fluid
interventions, but the network meta-analysis was consistent.
There is moderate certainty of evidence that in adults at increased risk of AKI who
are undergoing intravascular contrast imaging, the risk of incident AKI, and possibly RRT, is
similar with prophylactic hydration with either intravenous isotonic sodium bicarbonate or
0.9% saline solutions.615, 629, 630, 635-648, 652-665 While meta-analysis of all studies suggests a
benefit for preventing AKI with sodium bicarbonate, we found that high risk of bias trials
were more likely to report this finding. Our conclusion is based on sensitivity analyses
excluding high risk of bias trials, which found no statistically significant difference in risk of
incident AKI. For AKI, the certainty of evidence for studies with no methodological
limitations (low risk of bias) was downgraded to moderate due to imprecision and the
certainty of evidence for studies without serious methodological limitations (low or moderate
risk of bias) was downgraded to moderate due to some methodological limitations. The

230

certainty of evidence for RRT was very low due to imprecision, rare events in most studies,
and methodological limitations.

AF
T

Values and preferences
People at high risk of CA-AKI and healthcare professionals generally value
interventions that protect kidney function without introducing significant additional risk or
burden. Strategies that are simple, evidence-based, and have a favorable safety profile are
preferred. Prophylactic periprocedural volume expansion with intravenous crystalloids is
noninvasive, low cost, and well established in clinical practice. Preferences often lean toward
0.9% saline due to its widespread availability, lower cost, familiarity, and relative simplicity
of preparation and use. People at high-risk and their healthcare professionals typically
prioritize kidney protection and accept the inconvenience of fluid administration if it can
meaningfully reduce the risk of CA-AKI. However, people with conditions like heart failure
may place a high value on avoiding volume overload and may prefer tailored or more
conservative hydration approaches. For people with or at risk of complications from volume
overload, shared decision-making is important, with preferences influenced by perceived
risk, severity of comorbidities, prior experiences, and trust in the recommendation of the
clinical team.

D

R

Resource use and costs
Prophylactic intravenous crystalloids for people at high risk of CA-AKI is generally
considered a low-cost intervention, especially when compared to the potential expenses
associated with managing CA-AKI, including prolonged hospitalization, dialysis, and longterm care for CKD. The direct costs involve the solutions themselves, intravenous
administration supplies, and healthcare professional time for monitoring and delivery. Saline
(0.9%) is inexpensive, widely available, and already integrated into most hospital formularies
and workflows, making it a low-cost and low-resource option. In contrast, isotonic sodium
bicarbonate is generally more expensive and may require additional resources to support onsite compounding or special preparation. This can increase pharmacy and nursing workload
and resource requirements, as well as the potential for error.
Indirect costs may arise from extended pre- or post-procedure observation,
particularly in outpatient settings where additional staffing or bed occupancy is required.
While the intervention is relatively inexpensive, the cost-effectiveness depends on
appropriate patient selection. Targeting those at high risk of CA-AKI can avoid unnecessary
resource use in people at low risk. In settings with limited capacity or staffing, such as
outpatient settings, the logistics of administering fluids pre- and post-contrast may also
contribute to operational strain. Overall, when used judiciously in people at high risk,
prophylactic intravenous fluid administration is a resource-efficient strategy that may prevent
costlier complications.

231

AF
T

Considerations for implementation
Implementing this recommendation requires coordination across clinical teams to
identify people at high risk, and standardized protocols and infrastructure to support timely
fluid administration. Key considerations include use of strategies for identifying people at
high-risk using risk assessment tools. Protocols should promote the use of 0.9% saline, with
guidance on rate and duration of fluid administration with adjustments for comorbidities like
heart failure where fluid overload is a concern. Decision support tools that are integrated into
clinical workflows in radiology, cardiology, and emergency departments may aid
implementation.153 Education and training for staff, accompanied by audit and feedback, can
facilitate effective implementation. Access to day units or infusion spaces may be needed for
outpatient procedures. Overall, successful implementation depends on institutional
commitment, interdisciplinary collaboration, and mechanisms to monitor adherence and
outcomes.
Rationale
The use of iodinated radiocontrast media has been associated with the occurrence of
AKI, with varying rates reported depending on the population studied, the type, route and
dose of contrast agent being used, and the presence of other risk factors for AKI. Existing
data support the use of periprocedural fluid administration in people at high risk without fluid
overload but there is no evidence that a particular type of fluid is superior for AKI prevention
to 0.9% saline which is available worldwide. This recommendation is aligned with the joint
ACR/NKF Guideline.609 This recommendation is specific to fluid administration for CA-AKI
prevention, and distinct from Recommendation 3.1.2 favoring buffered crystalloids over
0.9% saline for other patient groups at risk of AKI/AKD.

R

Practice Point 4.9.2.2: In the absence of volume overload, it is appropriate to hold
diuretics when administering isotonic crystalloid to prevent CA-AKI in adults at high
risk.

D

Several trials have suggested that prophylactic diuretic administration increases the
incidence of CA-AKI, potentially by causing hypovolemia,666-668 although this has been an
inconsistent finding.669 Furthermore, several trials have found that matching hydration to
forced diuresis using furosemide can reduce the incidence of CA-AKI, when delivered using
of an integrated device matching saline fluid replacement to urine flow rate.625, 627
In a recent Cochrane review, prophylactic furosemide did not decrease the incidence
of CA-AKI in an analysis of 8 trials involving 1886 participants (RR: 0.87; 95% CI: 0.57–
1.34, P=0.54). Findings were similar in a subanalysis of 5 of these trials (n=1604
participants) that reported RRT incidence post-contrast (RR: 0.76; 95% CI: 0.35–1.65;
P=0.48).427 This review also included trials that compared the use of furosemide together
with an integrated device to match saline administration to urine flow rate versus saline
alone. A total of 1302 participants were included in 2 trials of people receiving coronary
232

AF
T

angiography, and 3 trials of transcatheter aortic valve replacement. There was no difference
in CA-AKI between furosemide-forced diuresis with device-guided urine output replacement
versus saline hydration (RR: 0.83; 95% CI: 0.48–1.44; P=0.51). Further, among the subgroup
of 8 trials (n=930 participants) comparing furosemide without an integrated urine flow rate
monitoring and fluid replacement device to saline hydration, the former did not significantly
change the incidence of CA-AKI (RR: 0.83; 95% CI: 0.53–1.28; P=0.39).427 However, it
should be noted that the cardiac procedures across these trials were significantly
heterogeneous, including 3 trials in participants having coronary angiography, 2 trials in
people undergoing cardiac surgery, 1 trial using furosemide to manage volume overload in
people in the ICU with respiratory failure, and a trial comparing atrial natriuretic peptide
versus saline (no furosemide). Thus, a personalized approach to decisions about the use of
diuretics in people at risk of CA-AKI and that the practice of withholding diuretics was
rational when administering prophylactic isotonic crystalloid for volume expansion in the
absence of volume overload.
4.9.3 Prophylactic therapies: Medication management
The Work Group agrees with the following practice point and radiology guideline
statements related to the intravenous administration of radiocontrast from the KDIGO 2024
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD.
Practice Point 4.9.3.1: The intravenous administration of radiocontrast media can be
managed in accordance with consensus statements from the radiology societies in
people with AKI or GFR <60 ml/min per 1.73 m2 (CKD G3a–G5) undergoing elective
investigation.

D

R

The Work Group refers the reader to the most recent radiology guidelines specifically
noting the difference between intravenous and intra-arterial radiocontrast:
• Use of low-osmolality contrast media and iso-osmolarity contrast media
• Use of minimum radiocontrast dose to achieve a diagnostic study
• Withdrawal of nonessential potentially nephrotoxic medications (e.g., NSAIDs,
diuretics, aminoglycosides, amphotericin, platins, zoledronate, and methotrexate) in
people with AKI or eGFR <30 ml/min per 1.73 m2 for 24–48 hours before and 48
hours after radiocontrast exposure
• In people with eGFR >30 ml/min per 1.73 m2 and without evidence of AKI,
metformin need not be stopped before iodinated contrast media (ICM)
administration, and there is no need for testing to evaluate GFR afterward. For
people with AKI or an eGFR ≤30 ml/min per 1.73 m2, it remains appropriate to stop
metformin at the time of or before ICM injection and should not be restarted for at
least 48 hours and only then if GFR remains stable and the ongoing use of
metformin has been reassessed by the clinical team.670
• Consideration of avoiding dehydration for people not undergoing dialysis and who
have eGFR <30 ml/min per 1.73 m2 or AKI and receiving intravenous contrast.671,
672

233

•

•

Use of N-acetylcysteine, ascorbic acid, furosemide, dopamine, fenoldopam, or
calcium channel blockers as preventative measures of CA-AKI has not been shown
to be a consistent benefit.610
Prophylactic pericontrast hemodialysis has been shown to be potentially harmful
and is not recommended.610

Recommendation 4.9.3.1: We suggest not routinely withholding renin-angiotensin
system inhibitors (RASi) before procedures with iodinated radiocontrast administration
in adults (2C).

AF
T

This recommendation places a high value on evidence synthesis of RCTs that have not
demonstrated significant differences in CA-AKI risk between the strategies of withholding or
continuing RASi in the periprocedural period for radiocontrast procedures. A systematic
review of 4 RCTs found no significant difference in CA-AKI incidence following temporary
ACEi or ARBs discontinuation versus continuation in participants undergoing elective
coronary angiography. This recommendation also places value on the potential harms of
inappropriate RASi withdrawal and medication errors that may result from the practice of
routine withdrawal.

D

R

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Four trials of withholding RASi were identified, including a total of 2042 participants
who underwent elective coronary angiography and/or a PCI with contrast (Supplementary
Table S77).673-676 There was no significant difference in CA-AKI incidence following
temporary ACEi or ARB discontinuation versus continuation in participants undergoing
elective coronary angiography (OR: 0.76; 95% CI: 0.48–1.19). Given the lack of precision in
the effect estimate, this result does not exclude the potential of a small reduction in CA-AKI
with ACEi or ARB withdrawal. However, potential harms may result from RASi withdrawal,
including exacerbation of heart failure, and medication management errors resulting in
failure to resume these medications for people with guideline recommended indications, such
as heart failure, diabetes, and CKD. However, the trials were generally underpowered to
detect significant differences in harms. It may be appropriate to withhold RASi during periprocedural management of adverse events such as hypotension, hyperkalemia, and AKI,
which requires an individualized rather than systematic approach. When RASi are withheld
due to short term periprocedural adverse events, healthcare professionals should reassess the
appropriateness of resuming treatment and restarting these agents, when possible, to improve
long-term outcomes.
Certainty of evidence
There is low certainty of evidence that, in adults receiving intravascular contrast for
cardiac procedures, there are not differences in incident AKI whether RASi are withheld or
not, with no evidence of differences for other benefits or harms.673-676 For incident AKI, the
234

certainty of evidence was downgraded for methodologic limitations of the studies and for
imprecision. For most other critical outcomes, including poor control of underlying
differences due to withholding RASi, events were rare resulting in imprecise or very
imprecise estimates.

AF
T

Values and preferences
Patient and healthcare professional values and preferences typically focus on
minimizing the risk of AKI while maintaining stable control of chronic conditions like
hypertension, heart failure, or CKD. Many people prioritize avoiding CA-AKI, especially if
they have preexisting abnormal kidney function, and may be open to temporarily stopping
medications if it is clearly explained as a precautionary measure. However, others may be
concerned about destabilizing their BP or worsening heart failure symptoms, particularly if
they have experienced complications from medication changes in the past. Patients also tend
to prefer clear, individualized guidance from their healthcare team, rather than routine or
automatic discontinuation of important long-term medications. Overall, preferences often
lean toward a personalized approach that balances potential kidney risks against the
importance of maintaining cardiovascular and hemodynamic stability with decisions made in
collaboration with trusted healthcare professionals.

D

R

Resource use and costs
Withholding RASi incurs minimal direct costs, as it primarily involves clinical
decision-making and patient counseling rather than additional medications or interventions.
However, indirect resource use can arise from the need for preprocedural medication
reviews, coordination among specialists (e.g., cardiology, nephrology, radiology), and
follow-up to reassess and restart therapy post-procedure. In some cases, discontinuation may
lead to adverse events such as uncontrolled hypertension, fluid retention, or heart failure
exacerbations, which can result in increased healthcare utilization, including emergency
visits or hospital admissions. Additionally, system-level protocols or electronic alerts may be
required to standardize the withholding and reinitiation process, adding to administrative and
information technology resource demands. Therefore, while the act of withholding RASi is
low-cost, the broader resource implications depend on the infrastructure needed to support
this practice.
Considerations for implementation
Implementing this strategy requires careful consideration of patient selection,
workflow integration, and communication across healthcare teams. A key challenge is
identifying which people might benefit from temporary RASi discontinuation, as the
evidence supporting routine withholding is uncertain and the risk-benefit balance varies by
individual factors such as baseline kidney function, cardiovascular and volume status. Clear
protocols and decision-support tools may help to guide healthcare professionals, but rigid
implementation could lead to inappropriate discontinuation in people for whom these
medications are critical for managing heart failure or hypertension. Effective implementation
235

also requires timely medication reconciliation, patient education about holding and restarting
the drugs, and coordination between procedural teams, primary care, and specialists. Without
such systems in place, there is a risk of miscommunication, prolonged interruption of
therapy, or adverse clinical outcomes. As such, a flexible, patient-centered approach with
clinical judgment is essential for safe and effective implementation.

AF
T

Rationale
The routine withholding of RASi such as ACEi or ARBs before exposure to iodinated
radiocontrast has been proposed as a strategy to reduce the risk of CA-AKI, based on the
theoretical concern that these medications may impair kidney autoregulation and exacerbate
contrast-induced nephrotoxicity. However, overall, evidence does not support a clinical
benefit from withholding RASi. While temporary discontinuation may modestly reduce the
risk of transient declines in kidney function in some people at high risk, it also carries
potential harm, including loss of BP control, exacerbation of heart failure, and interruption of
cardiovascular or kidney protection in people with chronic conditions. The balance of
benefits and harms therefore depends on individual risk factors, such as baseline kidney
function, volume status, and cardiovascular stability, supporting a more individualized
approach rather than a standard policy of withholding RASi before contrast exposure.

R

Accordingly, the Work Group suggested against routine withdrawal of these drugs
before elective contrast imaging procedures, due to lack of evidence for benefit with this
strategy and risk of potential harms if broadly applied. This suggestion differs from
statements to hold RASi before elective CT scans in people at risk of CA-AKI provided by
the ACR/NKF Guidelines and included within Practice Point 4.4.1.2 in KDIGO 2024
Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD.17, 609

D

4.10 Temporary withdrawal of medications to prevent AKI during major surgery
Recommendation 4.10.1: We suggest not routinely withholding renin-angiotensin
system inhibitors (RASi) to prevent AKI in adults having elective major cardiac (2D) or
non-cardiac surgery (2B).
This recommendation places a high value on evidence-based strategies to reduce the risk of
AKI and related perioperative complications following cardiac surgeries. There is evidence
that use of RASi increases the risk of hypotension, but there is no evidence that their use
significantly increases the risk of major perioperative complications or AKI following major
non-cardiac surgery. The effects of RASi use on AKI following cardiac surgery are uncertain.
This recommendation places value on the potential harms of inappropriate RASi withdrawal
that may result from a strategy of routine withdrawal and highlights the need for
individualized decision-making and management.

236

AF
T

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Use of RASi in the perioperative period has the potential to impair renal
autoregulation and contribute to hypotension during anesthesia. RCTs have shown a higher
risk of perioperative hypotension in adults who continue versus stop RASi before major
elective non-cardiac surgery; however, these trials have not demonstrated a reduction in
incidence of AKI risk when these agents are held preoperatively. The benefits of withholding
RASi to avoid perioperative hypotension must be carefully weighed against the potential
harms of discontinuation, including exacerbation of underlying conditions such as heart
failure or uncontrolled hypertension, and the risk of rebound hypertension. Thus, decisions
regarding RASi withholding should be individualized, balancing patient-specific
cardiovascular risks against potential kidney benefits, ideally guided by multidisciplinary
perioperative planning.

D

R

Major surgery can be defined as surgery with an expected duration >2 hours from the
surgical incision, and a post-operative hospital stay of ≥3 days.677 A systematic review, with
16 studies of perioperative ACEi or ARB cessation around elective major non-cardiac
surgeries included 8 RCTs that enrolled over 8000 subjects (Supplementarty Table S78).678
Although hypotension in the intraoperative and post-operative period was more common
among people continuing ACEi or ARB therapy compared to those withholding them,
mortality and major post-operative complications were no different with continuing versus
stopping RASi. In 2 RCTs (n=2476 participants) that included AKI as an outcome, the
incidence of AKI was not increased in the group that received perioperative RASi (OR: 1.01;
95% CI: 0.78–1.30) (Supplementary Table S78).678 Specifically, AKI incidence was 11% in
both groups in the “STOP or not STOP” trial by Legrand et al., and 10% in both groups in
the Strategies for Prescribing Analgesics Comparative Effectiveness (SPACE) trial. 679
Further, a published a prespecified secondary analysis of the PeriOperative ISchemic
Evaluation-3 (POISE-3) trial, a partial factorial RCT, compared a “hypotension avoidance
strategy” in which RASi were replaced with alternative antihypertensive agents in the
protocol versus a “hypertensive avoidance strategy” that continued usual antihypertensives
including RASi during major non-cardiac surgery.408 Although less intraoperative
hypotension was reported in the hypotension avoidance group, the incidence of AKI did not
differ between these groups (15.1% vs. 14.4%, RR: 1.05; 95% CI: 0.93–1.19), including
among subgroups with CKD .
It is uncertain based on current evidence whether continuing RASi perioperatively
during cardiac surgery is beneficial or harmful. The current literature has predominantly
included observational studies (Supplementary Table S79),680-682 and there has only been a
single RCT comparing temporary withdrawal versus continuation of RASi during cardiac
surgery that was underpowered for AKI-related outcomes.683

237

Certainty of evidence
There is moderate certainty of evidence that temporarily withdrawing RASi prior to
elective major non-cardiac surgery in adults does not alter the risk of AKI, but also without
evidence of increased risk of poor cardiac outcomes.678 The certainty of evidence for AKIrelated outcomes was downgraded due to imprecision. The certainty of evidence related to
poor control of underlying cardiac conditions was further downgraded due to some
inconsistency, imprecision, and sparse data for some events.

AF
T

There is very low certainty of evidence, from 1 small trial, that temporarily
withdrawing RASi prior to elective cardiac surgery (elective or urgent coronary artery bypass
graft and/or valve surgery) in adults does not alter the risk of AKI-related outcomes or death,
but also without evidence of increased risk of poor cardiac outcomes.683 The certainty of
evidence was downgraded for some methodological limitations, sparse evidence, and highly
imprecise estimates.

R

Values and preferences
Many people value the avoidance of serious complications like AKI, especially if it
could lead to prolonged hospitalization, dialysis, or CKD. As such, they may be willing to
temporarily withhold a familiar medication if there is a reasonable chance of reducing this
risk. However, people with conditions like heart failure or poorly controlled hypertension
may place a higher value on cardiovascular stability and continuity of therapy, expressing
concern about potential decompensation if RASi are withheld. Healthcare professionals,
meanwhile, must balance these patient preferences with clinical evidence, often erring on the
side of caution in stopping RASi in high-risk surgeries or in those with labile BP. Shared
decision-making, guided by a clear explanation of the potential risks and benefits, is crucial
to aligning treatment decisions with individual patient values.

D

Resource use and costs
Withholding RASi prior to major surgery involves relatively low direct costs, as it
typically requires only temporary discontinuation without the need for substitute
medications. However, the broader resource implications can vary. If withholding these
agents reduces the incidence of perioperative hypotension, this may lead to cost savings by
preventing complications such as AKI that require extended hospital stays, intensive
monitoring, or interventions like dialysis. On the other hand, if discontinuation leads to
decompensated heart failure, severe hypertension, or other cardiovascular complications, this
could increase healthcare utilization and associated costs. Additional resources may also be
needed for preoperative assessment, patient counseling, and post-operative monitoring to
manage the risks of withholding therapy. Overall, while the act of withholding is
inexpensive, its downstream effects on resource use and cost are highly dependent on
individual patient risk profiles and surgical complexity.

238

AF
T

Considerations for implementation
Implementing a strategy to withhold RASi before major surgery requires careful
coordination across the perioperative care team, including surgeons, anesthesiologists,
internists, and pharmacists. Clear protocols should be established to identify which people
are appropriate candidates for temporary discontinuation, typically those undergoing highrisk surgeries or with elevated AKI risk, while ensuring that those with contraindications to
withholding, such as heart failure or poorly controlled hypertension, are appropriately
managed. Timing is also critical; RASi are generally withheld 24 hours prior to surgery, and
plans must be in place for timely reinitiation post-operatively based on hemodynamic
stability and kidney function. Patient education is another key component, as people must
understand the rationale for withholding medications, they may have been taking long-term.
Implementation may be facilitated by clinical decision support tools within electronic
medical records to prompt appropriate withholding and follow-up, minimizing variability in
practice and supporting safe, individualized care.

R

Rationale
Current evidence does not support a routine strategy of withholding RASi
perioperatively during major non-cardiac or cardiac surgeries to reduce the incidence of postoperative AKI. However, surgical and anesthetic teams may choose to withhold RASi to
minimize the development and severity of perioperative hypotension by avoiding druginduced vasoplegia, thus reducing increased fluid and vasopressor requirements, and other
complications. These considerations may be more clinically relevant in people undergoing
emergency surgeries, particularly in people who are hemodynamically unstable, have
evolving AKI, or are developing hyperkalemia. Decision making may also differ for people
with reduced heart function. Finally, if these drugs are held for reversible periprocedural
adverse events (AKI, hyperkalemia, hypotension, and hyperkalemia), RASi should be
restarted, when possible, to improve long-term outcomes.

D

4.11 Medication management during intercurrent illness or “sick day protocols”
Recommendation 4.11.1: We suggest temporarily stopping specific classes of drugs in
the context of acute illnesses that predispose to volume depletion, to prevent AKI caused
by hypovolemia (2D).
The Work Group also agrees with the following practice point from Section 4.3 of the
KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD and
believe it also applies to people with AKI or AKD:17
Practice Point 4.11.1: If medications are discontinued during an acute illness,
communicate a clear plan of when to restart the discontinued medications to
the affected person and healthcare professionals, and ensure documentation
in the medical record.

239

This recommendation places a high value on strategies that can mitigate the adverse effects
of specific medications during acute illnesses that result in hypovolemia and reduced GFR.
RASi, diuretics, and NSAIDs can exacerbate volume depletion, reduce eGFR, and contribute
to the development of AKI. There is also a risk of adverse events from hypoglycemic agents
such as sulfonylureas and metformin when GFR declines. It is therefore rational to
temporarily stop these medications during an acute illness that can lead to AKI. This
recommendation acknowledges there is a lack of evidence of effective implementation
strategies for “sick-day protocols” and potential harms of inappropriate medication selfmanagement. Individualized decision-making, patient counselling, and self-management
strategies are required to implement this recommendation.

R

AF
T

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Temporarily stopping certain classes of medications during an acute illness that
predisposes to volume depletion (such as vomiting, diarrhea, or febrile illnesses) may help to
prevent AKI caused by hypovolemia. Medications commonly held in this context include
RASi diuretics, NSAIDs, and metformin, often referred to as part of a "sick day" protocol.
The benefit of this approach lies in reducing the risk of further compromising renal perfusion
or exacerbating volume depletion, which can precipitate or worsen AKI. However, there are
potential harms associated with this strategy. Interrupting these medications, particularly in
people with heart failure, diabetes, hypertension, or CKD may lead to destabilization of
chronic conditions, resulting in uncontrolled hypertension, hyperglycemia, or fluid overload.
Moreover, unclear instructions or inconsistent messaging may lead to inappropriate
discontinuation or delays in restarting therapy, potentially increasing the risk of adverse
outcomes. Therefore, while withholding these drugs during acute volume-depleting illnesses
may protect kidney function, it must be balanced with careful patient education,
individualized risk assessment, and close follow-up to ensure timely reinitiation once the
acute illness resolves.

D

Our systematic review of the use of “sick-day protocols” identified only 1 RCT that
evaluated the effect of an intervention to implement “sick day rules” on the outcome of AKI
(Supplementary Table S80).684 This 6-month trial followed 280 adults with CKD G3–G5
receiving a diuretic, RASi, NSAID, or metformin to management with a sick day protocol
versus standard management.684 The primary endpoint of eGFR change after 6 months did
not differ between groups nor was there any difference in the very low incidence of AKI or
hospitalization over this short follow-up period. Notably, usability testing of the sick-day
protocol revealed frequent errors in protocol use and a high rate of failure by participants in
identifying the correct medications to be withheld. This highlights safety concerns for patient
self-management, including the risk of applying sick-day protocols to inappropriately
classified illnesses, such as heart failure, where holding medications might be deleterious.
Our systematic review also identified 6 trials that evaluated withholding RASi in people with
acute COVID-19 (Supplementary Table S81).685-689 In these trials, withholding versus
240

continuation of RASi similarly failed to demonstrate effects on AKI-related events, mortality,
or other clinical endpoints; although, estimates were mostly very imprecise due to rare
events.

AF
T

Certainty of evidence
There is very low certainty of evidence that stopping various medications in adults
with acute illnesses or COVID-19 does not affect the risk of AKI but may increase the risk of
unplanned hospital admissions.684,685-689 Evaluated medications included RASi, loop, or
thiazide diuretics, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, metformin, and NSAIDs. The
evidence for non-COVID-19 illnesses is based on a single study, which was downgraded for
methodological limitations, imprecision, and sparse data. The evidence for COVID-19 was
downgraded primarily for highly imprecise estimates of effect for AKI-related outcomes and
for some methodological limitations and inconsistent findings.

R

Values and preferences
People generally prioritize avoiding serious complications such as AKI, particularly if
they understand the potential for long-term consequences like CKD or dialysis. Many are
willing to make changes to their medications temporarily if clearly advised that doing so can
prevent harm during periods of acute illness. However, people with chronic conditions such
as heart failure, hypertension, diabetes, or CKD may also value stability and continuity in
managing these conditions and may feel anxious about stopping medications they have been
counselled to take regularly. Preferences may vary based on past experiences, health literacy,
and trust in their healthcare professionals. Healthcare professionals must consider these
factors and engage in shared decision-making, providing clear, personalized guidance on
when and how to pause and resume medications, to align care with an individual patient’s
values, goals, and understanding of risk.

D

Resource use and costs
Temporarily stopping medications is a low-cost intervention in itself; however,
effective implementation may incur indirect costs related to the patient education, clinical
monitoring, and follow-up care required. Resources are needed to ensure people understand
when and which medications to pause, including healthcare professional time, educational
materials, or decision-support tools. Inadequate communication can lead to inappropriate
discontinuation or failure to restart therapy, potentially resulting in increased healthcare
utilization due to poorly controlled chronic conditions or adverse drug events. On the other
hand, by preventing episodes of AKI, temporary drug cessation may reduce hospital
admissions, diagnostic testing, and long-term complications, offering potential cost savings
to the healthcare system. Overall, while the intervention is simple and inexpensive, its costeffectiveness depends on coordinated implementation and effective self-management when
attempted in community settings.

241

AF
T

Considerations for implementation
Key considerations for implementation include identifying which medications should
be paused and establishing clear criteria for when to withhold and restart them. Research
suggests that errors in implementing sick day guidance protocols are frequent. Successful
implementation depends heavily on patient education and empowerment, as people must be
able to recognize symptoms of volume depletion (e.g., vomiting, diarrhea, fever) and
understand how to respond appropriately. Healthcare professionals must ensure consistent
messaging across care settings, which can be supported by integrating “sick day rules” into
routine care through printed materials, pharmacist counseling, and digital health tools.
Attention is needed for high-risk populations, such as older adults or those with cognitive
impairments, who may require caregiver involvement. Additionally, systems should be in
place for timely follow-up to reassess medication needs once the acute illness resolves,
minimizing the risk of inappropriate drug dosing or prolonged treatment interruption.

D

R

The PAUSE Preventing Medication Complications During Acute Illness Through
Symptom Evaluation and Sick Day Guidance (PAUSE) Medication Safety Advisory Panel
developed consensus-based recommendations for sick day medication guidance (SDMG)
through a Delphi process. These recommendations (with a ≥80% voter rating in the Delphi
survey) are provided in Table 40 and highlight that SDMG should focus on patient, or
caregiver for children, self-management in conjunction with support from their healthcare
professional.690

242

R

AF
T

Table 40 | Sick day medication guidance for adults
Triggers to initiate sick day medication guidance:
• Vomiting or diarrhea, resulting in significant fluid losses
• Anorexia or nausea, resulting in significant decrease in fluid intake
• New light-headedness, dizziness, or fainting, particularly with sitting or standing up
• Decreased weight (3 kg in 2 days)
• Decreased urine output
When self-management is appropriate:
• There is an absence of severe symptoms
• Patients (and carers) feel they can cope
• Patients can keep up with their fluid intake
Medications that should be temporarily stopped (until symptoms are resolved or up to 3 days,
whichever is earliest):
• Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi)/angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs)
• Loop diuretics
• Thiazides/thiazide-like diuretics
• Potassium-sparing diuretics
• Sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors
• Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
• Metformin
• If blood glucose is low, hold insulin/sulfonylurea/meglitinide until blood glucose recovers
• If blood glucose is more elevated than usual, empirical 10%–20% increase in basal and bolus
insulin doses (if unsuccessful at lowering blood glucose, contact healthcare professional)
• Angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitors
• Direct rein inhibitors
When assistance/support from healthcare professional should be sought:
• Patients feel they are not coping
• Signs and symptoms have not resolved within 72 hours
• Patients cannot keep up with intake of foods or fluids
• Patients have recurrent low blood glucose readings
• Patients experience significant increase in blood glucose not coming down with selfadjustment after 24 hours
Adapted from Watson et al.690

D

Rationale
The Work Group supports the position that “sick day protocols” that involve
temporarily withholding select medications can be a useful approach,690 as discussed in
Section 4.3 of the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and
Management of CKD.17 This may be applied to appropriately selected people with chronic
conditions treated with the following medications: sulfonylureas, ACEi, diuretics, direct
renin inhibitors, metformin, ARBs, NSAIDs, and SGLT2i (often described with the acronym
“SADMANS”).691 However, there is a paucity of evidence of strategies to implement sick
day protocols effectively,684, 687-689 and there are significant safety concerns with previously
described approaches. Healthcare professionals should ensure consistent education and
messaging across care settings and provide adequate self-management support through
printed materials, pharmacist counselling, and digital health tools. Caution applying selfmanagement strategies is warranted in younger or older people and those with cognitive
243

impairment, who may require caregiver involvement. Mechanisms should be in place for
timely follow-up to support people making medication changes, including resuming
medications appropriately once the acute illness resolves.

AF
T

There is potential for harm if people make mistakes in recognizing an acute illness
associated with risk of volume depletion, identifying which drugs are appropriate to stop ,
and when to restart them.692 A failure to restart appropriate medications is a commonly
reported problem. Accordingly, the Work Group endorses Practice Point 4.3.2 from the
KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD
repeated above17 emphasizing that a plan to restart medications that have been temporarily
discontinued should be clearly communicated to patients and other healthcare professionals.
Documentation of this plan in the medical record may improve consistency and continuity of
care. Patients may additionally benefit from medication review within a month to ensure
appropriate medications are restarted at the correct dose.
4.12. Considerations specific to children
4.12.1 Biomarker characterization of drug-related AKI
Practice Point 4.12.1.1: Urine biomarkers of kidney damage can be helpful in detecting
nephrotoxin-associated AKI in newborns..

D

R

Kidney damage biomarkers may help in identifying AKI in neonates exposed to
multiple nephrotoxic drugs.693 Urinary NGAL can be utilized for AKI detection without the
need for blood draws which contribute to neonatal anemia. It also avoids the interference of
maternal SCr on AKI detection. The negative predictive value of a urine NGAL value ≤250
ng/ml was 96.8% (95% CI: 93.3%–100%) and urine NGAL ≥400 ng/ml demonstrated a
positive likelihood ratio of 2.76 (95% CI: 1.39–4.13) when compared against daily SCr
testing in neonates exposed to nephrotoxic drugs. This suggests that urine NGAL may have a
role for detection in drug-related AKI in neonates, replacing blood draws in those exposed to
nephrotoxic medications. However, more research is needed and the ideal urine NGAL
thresholds require further validation.694
4.12.2. Management of drugs eliminated by the kidney
Practice Point 4.12.2.1: Trends in SCr and urine output can be used to guide dosing of
drugs excreted by the kidney. The validity of KeGFR equations to inform drug dosing
in children is uncertain.
Like in adults, the GFR estimating equations developed for children with CKD are
unreliable in AKI because they assume a steady state of SCr. Similar to equations in adults,
these formulas will overestimate GFR when SCr is rising and underestimate GFR when SCr
is falling. For children with AKI, it is important to consider trends in SCr and urine output
when dosing drugs excreted by the kidney. There is a lack of data on the utility of KeGFR
equations for drug dosing in the pediatric population. Until more evidence is available,
244

D

R

AF
T

healthcare professionals should exercise caution and adjust dosing based on clinical response
and drug levels when possible.

245

CHAPTER 5. RENAL REPLACEMENT THERAPY

AF
T

5.1. Starting renal replacement therapy (RRT)
RRT is an important kidney and organ support intervention for patients with AKI in
modern clinical care. RRT may be required in a substantial proportion of acutely ill patients
with AKI, depending on the population-at-risk and clinical context (e.g., septic shock, liver
failure, cardiogenic shock).695 Recent trends show increasing utilization, particularly in highresource settings.696, 697 Decisions to start and discontinue RRT in acutely ill patients with
AKI are complex and influenced by a range of issues, including overall prognosis (i.e.,
potential for survival, resolution of acute illness, and RRT independence), the relative
balance of risks to benefits, the availability of suitable expertise and resources, and patient
preferences (Figure 14).528

R

Figure 14 | Schematic diagram of RRT continuum. RRT, renal replacement therapy.
Adapted from Ostermann et al.528

D

Practice Point 5.1.1: For children and adults with AKI, a process of informed shared
decision-making should be used with patients, family, caregivers, and healthcare
professionals on the relative merit and risk of treatment with RRT.
An essential consideration for treatment with RRT is the tailoring of decisions based
on the values and preferences of patients and/or surrogate decision makers (e.g., family,
caregiver) through an engaged process of informed, ethically acceptable, shared decisionmaking.698 Shared decision-making can be defined as “a collaborative process that allows
patients, or their surrogates, and clinicians to make health care decisions together, taking into
account the best scientific evidence available, as well as the patient’s values, goals, and
preferences”.698
Shared decision-making is widely endorsed by numerous health care organizations,
including critical care and nephrology.698, 699 Patients/surrogate decision-makers report
greater satisfaction with care when confronted with transparent, consistent, and frequent
246

opportunities to communicate and share in the creation of the care plan with the healthcare
team.700 Shared decision-making can provide greater clarity on the direction of care.701, 702 In
selected circumstances, this may include foregoing RRT or escalations in care. 703, 704
Provision of short-term RRT when benefits are uncertain may involve a time-limited-trial, to
build trust with the patient and/or surrogate decision-makers, strengthen prognostic certainty,
and shape consensus on decision-making for a care plan.705, 706 Time-limited trials can
facilitate a process of shared decision-making and have been shown to improve the quality of
family meetings and reduce resource use, including RRT.707

AF
T

While RRT can be life-sustaining for patients suffering complications of AKI, access
to RRT services can be a challenge, particularly in low-resource settings. Barriers to RRT
include disparate hospital resources, geographic remoteness to a center with dialysis services,
and patient-incurred costs (i.e., inability to pay for any or a sustained period of dialysis).
Similarly, women are disproportionately less likely to access and receive RRT, especially in
low- and middle-resource settings.708, 709 In sub-Saharan Africa, mortality of children and
adults with AKI and indications for RRT but no access (i.e., did not receive) was reportedly
72%–79% and 86%, respectively, far in excess of the observed mortality of 24%–31% and
32%–31%% when RRT was available.709

R

There are numerous validated decision-making strategies (i.e., approaches; tools) that
are available and that can be adapted to facilitate complex decision-making around the
provision of RRT.698 The use of decision-making algorithms may improve consistency and
standardization of approaches and facilitate a framework for shared decision-making.154, 710
Key aspects of such a framework broadly include; i) clarifying available treatment options,
ii) weighing the relative risks and benefits, iii) understanding individual patient values and
preferences, and iv) articulating a schedule to engage in partnered decision-making with the
healthcare team.710

D

Recommendation 5.1.1: For adults with AKI, we recommend a strategy of deferred
timing of RRT initiation as preferred over a strategy of early (pre-emptive) RRT
initiation (1C).
This recommendation places a high value on avoiding the potentially unnecessary burden,
resource use and costs, and potential harms associated with earlier initiation of RRT. There
is low overall certainty of evidence of no differences in mortality, long-term RRT
dependency, or other serious harms with deferred versus early RRT initiation in adults with
AKI. A deferred RRT initiation strategy is based on the emergence of clinical indications for
RRT (medically refractory metabolic or volume-related complications of AKI), rather than
relying solely on creatinine or urine output-based criteria (Table 41). Deferred RRT
initiation requires the capacity for prompt RRT initiation when indicated, and healthcare
professionals should be mindful of local logistical factors when considering RRT timing.

247

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
All forms of RRT are invasive organ support interventions that carry inherent risks,
which may increase with prolonged use. These complications can arise from the insertion and
ongoing maintenance of dialysis catheters (e.g., bloodstream infection, peritoneal infection),
therapy-specific adverse events (e.g., bleeding, hemodynamic instability, arrhythmias,
electrolyte abnormalities), and long-term adverse outcomes (e.g., delayed or nonresolution of
AKI).

AF
T

The timing of starting RRT in the absence of conventional indications for RRT has
long presented a central dilemma for healthcare professionals (Table 41; Figure 14) and been
the focus of several RCTs in acutely ill adults.124, 128, 711-713 In these RCTs, acutely ill adults
with Stage 2–3 AKI and no conventional indications (e.g., metabolic, toxic or fluid-related
complications) were allocated to an early (“accelerated” or “pre-emptive”) or a deferred
(“standard” or “delayed”) strategy for starting RRT.

D

R

Deferred RRT initiation involves waiting until patients have medically refractory
complications or persistent Stage 2 or 3 AKI exceeding 48–72 hours. Most recent large
multicenter RCTs in adults have largely aligned around this definition of deferred RRT
initiation (alternatively termed delayed, late, or standard initiation),124, 712-714 however, there
has been some variation.128 This variation can present challenges when interpretating the
evidence across trials and applying it to individual patients. For example, of the 231
participants in the Early vs. Delayed Initiation of Renal Replacement Therapy in Critically Ill
Patients with Acute Kidney Injury (ELAIN) trial, 46.8% were enrolled after having
undergone cardiac surgery.128 AKI after cardiac surgery is common and may be associated
with a unique pathophysiology and constellation of complications when compared with other
groups of patients with AKI.715 This may include nuanced differences in the capacity to
tolerate complications related to AKI (e.g., fluid accumulation in the setting of reduced heart
function, electrolyte/metabolic abnormalities in a setting of increased risk of arrhythmias).
Systematic reviews have focused on synthesizing evidence on timing of initiation of RRT in
participants after cardiac surgery.716, 717 These have included relatively few RCTs128, 718, 719
and observational studies with high risk of bias.720-724 While pooled analysis implied there
may be benefit to earlier RRT initiation in participants after cardiac surgery with AKI, this
evidence has very-low to low certainty.

248

D

R

AF
T

Table 41 | Summary of indications for starting RRT in adults with AKI when implementing a
deferred RRT initiation strategy.
Urgent indications
• Severe hyperkalemia (K+ ≥6.0 mmol/l, rapidly rising, or
(in the absence of
cardiac toxicity) refractory to medical therapy
contraindications to RRT)
• Severe acidemia or metabolic acidosis (pH ≤7.2 or serum
bicarbonate ≤12 mmol/l despite normal or low arterial
pCO2) refractory to medical therapy
• Severe hypoxemia and perception of volume overload
(diuretic-resistant pulmonary edema)
• Excessive fluid accumulation refractory to medical
intervention
• Uremic complications (bleeding, pericarditis,
encephalopathy)
• Severe hyperammonemia (inborn errors of metabolisms,
liver failure)
• Severe intoxication with a dialyzable drug or toxin
(salicylates, lithium, toxic alcohols, metformin)
Relative indications
• Persistent severe AKI (KDIGO Stage 3 ± prolonged
(in the absence of urgent
oligoanuria)
indications of AKI)
• Severe non-kidney organ dysfunction exacerbated by AKI
• Severe or worsening illness acuity and trajectory
• Anticipated solute burden (tumor lysis syndrome;
rhabdomyolysis; intravascular hemolysis)
• Limited physiological reserve to tolerate the consequences
of AKI (i.e., demand-supply mismatch, severe non-kidney
comorbidities)
• Inability to provide target nutritional support due to fluid
restriction
Relative contraindications
• Low likelihood for benefit (futile prognosis)
• Receiving palliative care and/or approaching end-of-life
• High likelihood of non-recovery of kidney function in
patients who are not long-term dialysis candidates
Adapted from Ostermann et al.725 AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidney disease; ICU,
intensive care unit; KDIGO, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes; pCO2, partial pressure of
carbon dioxide; RRT, renal replacement therapy.

No differences in 90-day mortality, 90-day dialysis dependency, length of stay (ICU
and hospital), and serious adverse events were found between early versus deferred RRT
initiation (Supplementary Table S82).125, 726-728 This finding would imply that a deferred
strategy to starting RRT, characterized as a “watch and wait” strategy, where RRT is delayed
until confronted with worsening, persistent or medically refractory complications of AKI in
acutely ill patients, can be recommended as the default standard.
In a substantial proportion of those participants allocated to the strategy of deferred
RRT initiation across these RCTs, RRT was not started (range 10%–49%), due either to
kidney recovery or death, potentially contributing to lower resource use and costs of care.124,
128, 712, 713 However, in the Initiation of Dialysis Early Versus Delayed in the Intensive Care
Unit (IDEAL-ICU) trial, 17% of participants with septic shock allocated to the deferred RRT
249

initiation strategy did receive emergent RRT for medically refractory complications within
48 hours of randomization.124 This observation reinforces the need for regular reassessment
of the patients and also the further need for development and validation of clinical risk
prediction tools (e.g., diagnostic tests, dynamic assessments, etc.) to improve real-time
identification of patients most likely to derive benefit from starting RRT earlier.171, 180, 729

AF
T

It is further plausible that accumulation and persistence of AKI-related complications
may exert the risk for adverse outcomes.730 In the Artificial Kidney Initiation for Kidney
Injury 2 (AKIKI-2) trial, acutely ill participants with persistent Stage 3 AKI without urgent
RRT indications were allocated to either start RRT immediately (aligned with the “delayed”
strategy in the Artificial Kidney Initiation in Kidney Injury [AKIKI] trial) or further deferral
(“more-delayed”), starting RRT only for a serum urea >50 mmol/l or an urgent conventional
indication.125 While there was no difference in the number of RRT-free days at 28 days
between the groups (12 days for delayed vs. 10 days for more-delayed, P=0.93), in a
prespecified analysis, 60-day mortality was higher in the more-delayed strategy compared to
the delayed-strategy (55% for more-delayed vs. 44% for delayed; adjusted HR: 1.65; 95%
CI: 1.09–2.50; P=0.07; Supplementary Table S83).125 In addition, participants who were in a
coma at randomization had a lower chance of transitioning from coma to awakening and
remained comatose for longer.731 These findings support the concept that prolonged delays
should be avoided within a deferred RRT initiation strategy.

R

Individual studies provide further insights not captured in the formal syntheses. In the
AKIKI trial, the earlier RRT initiation strategy conferred a higher risk of catheter-related
bloodstream infections compared with a standard RRT initiation strategy (10% vs. 5%,
P=0.03).712 In the Standard (deferred) versus Accelerated (early) Initiation of RenalReplacement Therapy in Acute Kidney Injury (STARRT-AKI) trial, more people receiving
the earlier RRT initiation strategy experienced adverse events (23.0% vs. 16.5%, P<0.001),
including hemodynamic instability and electrolyte abnormalities (e.g., hypophosphatemia).

D

Finally, there may be important differences between specific groups of patients that
have not been the specific focus or have been underrepresented in RCTs (e.g.,
neonates/children732; cardiogenic shock733; solid-organ transplantation734, 735; extracorporeal
life support [ECLS]736), where there may be differences in the development of medically
refractory complications, differences in tolerating these complications, and/or differences in
relative indications for starting RRT and potential benefits with early or deferred initiation.
Certainty of evidence
The certainty of evidence in adults for the comparison of early versus standard (or
delayed) RRT is low.125, 726-728 The certainty of evidence was downgraded for imprecision
across outcomes, with inconsistency across studies pertaining to mortality and reporting
issues pertaining to adverse events, with sparse data for several outcomes.

250

One trial with methodological concerns provided very low certainty of evidence for
comparison of delayed (standard) versus more-delayed (very late) RRT.125, 726-728 The trial
had mostly very imprecise estimates of effect, but did find a significantly higher risk of death
with more-delayed RRT.
Values and preferences
Survivors of critical illness treated with RRT report impaired quality-of-life (QoL)
and function (e.g., new or worsened disability).737-740 This recommendation placed high value
on the potential for avoidance of RRT when applicable.

AF
T

Resource use and costs
RRT represents an escalation in the complexity of care and is both resource intensive
and costly.741 In many low-resource settings, receipt of RRT is paid out-of-pocket, putting
patients at risk of accelerated economic decline. A deferred strategy for RRT initiation may
translate into a meaningful proportion of people with moderate-to-severe AKI averting use of
RRT and lead to concomitant reductions in resource use and costs.742

R

Considerations for implementation
The adoption of a deferred strategy for RRT initiation is likely suitable for most
acutely ill adults with moderate-to-severe AKI. However, variation in case-mix (e.g.,
cardiorenal syndrome, hepatorenal syndrome, post-cardiac surgery, concomitant organ
support with ECLS), and rapid changes in illness acuity and clinical status, and timeliness
and availability of essential resources (e.g., vascular access insertion, dialysis equipment,
staffing) may influence decision-making. Sound clinical judgement that considers these and
other local contextual factors is essential and requires frequent reassessment, especially in
rapidly evolving clinical scenarios. Adherence to guidance on RRT initiation can be
integrated into best practice advisories and monitored through quality improvement
methodology.743

D

Rationale
The decision to start RRT can be complex, given the need to balance perceived
benefits and risks, the escalation in resources (e.g., patient transfer, dialysis disposables,
human resources), and the importance of shared decision-making that integrates the values
and preferences of patients. A fundamental consideration for healthcare professionals when
considering whether to start RRT is to ensure clarity in defining the objective(s) and the
goal(s) of therapy. Initiation of RRT is appropriate for acutely ill patients with complications
attributed to or worsened by AKI, especially if refractory to medical therapy (e.g.,
hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, fluid overload), whose preferences and goals of care are
aligned with receipt of RRT. In the absence of urgent indications for RRT, the evidence
supports a strategy of deferred timing of RRT initiation over early RRT initiation.

251

Practice Point 5.1.2: For children and adults with AKI and high probability of
requiring RRT, planning for RRT should be considered before indications are met,
including, where applicable and available, transfer to centers with nephrology and RRT
services.
Observational studies imply delayed referral to and consultation with specialist
nephrology services for selected patients with AKI may portend greater risk for poor
outcome, including the risk of life-threatening complications of AKI and need for emergency
dialysis.744-747 There is uncertainty whether this may relate to the availability of specialist
nephrology services, including the availability of RRT for acutely ill patients.708
Nephrologist referral and consultation provide opportunity for long-term continuity of care,
follow-up for recognized complications associated with AKI and planning of RRT.748

AF
T

Practice Point 5.1.3: For children and adults with AKI and medically refractory fluid,
electrolyte, acid-base, and/or metabolic complications (e.g., uremia), initiate RRT if
consistent with patient preferences and goals of care.
There is long-standing general acceptance for the acute initiation of RRT among
patients with AKI and medically refractory complications independent of SCr values. 608, 749
RRT in this context is beneficial by effectively treating acutely reversible complications
(e.g., hyperkalemia; metabolic acidosis; uremia; fluid overload) and offering opportunity for
AKI to resolve. Delay or failure to provide therapy for refractory complications of AKI can
portend a high risk for mortality.124, 711, 730, 750

R

Practice Point 5.1.4: Among patients with hepatic encephalopathy (grade ≥2) due to
acute or acute-on-chronic liver failure, initiation of continuous RRT (CRRT) to manage
hyperammonemia may be considered even when conventional RRT indications are
absent.

D

CRRT can effectively clear ammonia, may reduce cerebral edema, and may be
associated with a reduction in mortality among patients with hepatic encephalopathy due to
acute or acute-on-chronic liver failure.751-754 The Work Group concurred with the guidance
on the use of CRRT among patients with acute liver failure that were included in the 2023
American Society of Gastroenterology Acute Liver Failure Guidelines.755
Practice Point 5.1.5: For critically ill children and adults with AKI, a time-limited trial
of RRT can be started if uremic and/or metabolic complications are plausibly
confounding neurological evaluation or chances of awakening from coma.
In a secondary analysis of the AKIKI-2 trial, among those people with coma at
enrollment, allocation to the more-delayed strategy conveyed lower likelihood of awakening
and fewer days awake compared with the delayed strategy.731 These findings provide
252

AF
T

evidence of the potential risks from complications of persistent severe AKI with longer
delays to RRT. A time-limited trial of RRT may be used to facilitate the evaluation and
management of potentially modifiable/reversible complications of AKI (Figure 15).
Furthermore, a time-limited trial enables an evaluation of the goals of treatment in line with
shared-decision making.

Figure 15 | Proposed algorithm for initiation RRT in critically ill patients with AKI.
AKI, acute kidney injury; RRT, renal replacement therapy. Adapted from Ostermann et al.756

R

Practice Point 5.1.6: For children and adults with AKI, particularly those receiving
vasoactive support, identify and treat modifiable factors and mitigators of
hemodynamic instability at the commencement of RRT.

D

Hemodynamic instability during RRT occurs with relative frequency among acute
and critically ill children and adults and may portend greater risk of adverse outcomes,
including mortality and non-recovery of kidney function.757-761 Hemodynamic instability
commonly occurs upon circuit connection and start of RRT.757, 759, 762 Patients with greater
illness acuity, those receiving vasoactive support, patients exposed to high ultrafiltration rates
and neonates and children (where the extracorporeal volume of the circuit is relatively large
in proportion to total blood volume) may be more susceptible.762 Table 44 lists potential RRT
related interventions to limit hemodynamic instability during RRT.
5.2. RRT modality
RRT modalities include CRRT, intermittent RRT (IRRT) including the spectrum
from conventional intermittent hemodialysis (IHD) to prolonged intermittent RRT (PIRRT),
and peritoneal dialysis (PD). All modalities have a role in AKI but vary in their spectrum of
benefits and potential complications (Table 42).763
253

D
R

AF
T

Table 42 | Summary of each RRT modality along with their commonly applied settings, advantages, and disadvantages
Modality
Potential setting in AKI
Advantages
Disadvantages
IHD
• Hemodynamically stable patients
• Rapid removal of small solutes or
• Hemodynamic intolerance and IDH
toxins
• Circumstances necessitating rapid
• Dialysis disequilibrium with risk of
removal of small solutes (e.g., tumor
• Allows for "down time" for diagnostic
cerebral edema in cases of rapid
lysis syndrome, drug overdose)
and therapeutic procedures and
removal of osmotically active
interventions
substances
• Reduced exposure to anticoagulation
• Lower short-term costs than CRRT
PIRRT (also
• Hemodynamically unstable patients
• Slower volume and solute removal
• Slower clearance of toxins
referred to as
• Hemodynamic stability
• Lower risk of IDH compared to IHD
SLED or EDD)
• Allows for "down time" for diagnostic
and therapeutic procedures
• Reduced exposure to anticoagulation
• Use of conventional IHD machines
CRRT
• Hemodynamically unstable patients
• Continuous correction and removal of
• Slower clearance of toxins per hour
solutes, metabolites, and toxins with
• Patients at risk of intracranial
• Need for specific RRT platform
less fluctuations in serum
hypertension or increased intracranial
• Need for anticoagulation in most
concentrations
pressure
patients
• Hemodynamic stability
• Patient immobilization
• Easy control of fluid balance
• Risk of hypothermia
• Real-time adaptability among critically • Inadvertent losses of water-soluble
ill patients with high illness acuity
nutrients and medications
• May reduce the risk of inciting or
• Increased costs
exacerbating cerebral edema
• May be most appropriate for critically
ill patients with AKI who are also
receiving ECLS, mechanical circulatory
support or ECCO2R
PD
• Hemodynamically unstable patients
• Technically simple
• Less control of rate of fluid removal
• Coagulopathy
• Hemodynamic stability
• Lower clearance efficacy compared to
IHD or CRRT
• Difficult vascular access
• Gradual removal of toxins
•
Need for peritoneal dialysis catheter
• Low-resource settings
• Less fluctuations in serum
concentrations of osmotically active
• Risk of peritonitis
• Preferred RRT modality for selected
substances
children with AKI (e.g., complex
• Risk of pleural effusion in case of
congenital cardiac surgery)
• No need for anticoagulation
diaphragmatic defect
254

• Hyperglycemia
• May negative impact pulmonary
compliance and worsen gas-exchange
• Requires intact peritoneal cavity and
preserved peritoneal membrane
• Reduced clearance in conditions
associated with reduced bowel motility
CLUrea, ureal clearance; CRRT, continuous renal replacement therapy; ECLS, extracorporeal life support; ECCO 2R, extracorporeal CO2 removal; IHD,
intermittent hemodialysis; IDH, intradialytic hypotension; PD, peritoneal dialysis; PIRRT, prolonged intermittent renal replacement therapy; QB, blood flow
rate; QD, dialysis flow rate; QR, replacement fluid rate; RRT, renal replacement therapy; SLED, sustained low-efficiency dialysis; UFNET, net ultrafiltration;
EDD, extended daily dialysis

D
R

AF
T

• No need for vascular access
• Lower resource use

255

Practice Point 5.2.1: The initial selection of RRT modality in children and adults with
AKI, including CRRT, intermittent RRT (IRRT), or acute peritoneal dialysis (PD),
should integrate patient characteristics, clinical context, local expertise, and resource
availability.

AF
T

There is a spectrum of RRT modalities used to support acute and critically ill patients
with severe AKI who develop indications for RRT. These RRT modalities include
extracorporeal support with CRRT and IRRT as well as acute PD. RRT modalities are
characterized by differences in application (e.g., access, treatment schedules, dosing) and
mechanisms of solute clearance and ultrafiltration (Tables 42 and 43). There are variable
practices across clinical settings and geographic regions for the selection of RRT modality
for treatment of patients with AKI, due to differences in patient characteristics, clinician
expertise and preferences, institutional/organizational factors, and resource availability.
Further, patients may transition from one modality to another, for instance from CRRT to
IRRT. The ideal timing and clinical circumstances for RRT modality transition are uncertain
but are also influenced by patient characteristics and organizational factors.
Recommendation 5.2.1: For critically ill adults with AKI and hemodynamic instability,
we suggest using CRRT or acute PD over conventional IRRT (2C).

R

This recommendation places a high value on the advantages of greater hemodynamic
stability reported with continuous forms of RRT, including CRRT and acute PD, over
conventional intermittent RRT. The recommendation is focused on the selection of RRT
modality for patients with hemodynamic instability because it may exacerbate kidney damage
and impair or prolong resolution of AKI. It places a high value on the shorter duration of
RRT and ICU stay among patients treated with acute PD over conventional intermittent RRT.
This recommendation places a lower value on the greater resource use and costs of CRRT
compared with conventional intermittent RRT.

D

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
CRRT, IRRT, and PD have specific advantages and potential complications.
Compared with IRRT, CRRT and PD enable more gradual ultrafiltration and solute removal
and may be particularly advantageous in patients with hemodynamic instability. (Table 43)
A large network meta-analysis found no difference in all-cause mortality, time on
RRT, recovery of kidney function, or length of hospital and ICU stay when comparing CRRT
with IRRT (Supplementary Table S84).764 However, studies included in these pooled
estimates comprised heterogeneous populations with varying levels of hemodynamic
instability (Supplementary Table S82). Moreover, many studies comparing CRRT with IRRT
excluded participants with hemodynamic instability because of the perceived risk of harm in
randomizing a hemodynamically unstable patient to IRRT. Although the available pooled
256

evidence suggested no differences in benefits or harms when comparing CRRT and IHD, the
majority of panel members perceived that the theoretical risk of harm with IRRT outweighed
the increased incremental cost with CRRT and, therefore, favored CRRT for critically ill
patients with hemodynamic instability.
The same network meta-analysis found that compared with IRRT, acute PD reduced
the length of time on RRT and ICU stay (with large apparent treatment effects), with no
difference in all-cause mortality or recovery of kidney function (Supplementary Table
S85).764 Collectively, this body of evidence suggests important potential benefits with no
apparent risk of harm, recognizing that acute PD may not be available in all care settings.

D

R

AF
T

There have been few small, largely single center RCTs765-770 and systematic
reviews771, 772 that have compared the efficacy and outcomes of acute PD versus
extracorporeal RRT, including CRRT and IRRT, for critically ill participants with AKI.
Their findings have been largely supported by real-world evidence from observational
studies.773-775 One single center RCT compared acute PD to CRRT in 70 adults with sepsisassociated AKI.766 While participants allocated to acute PD had worse outcomes, the
technique for acute PD was not aligned with current guideline-directed standards (e.g., use of
rigid catheters, use of manual exchanges and open drainage, acetate buffered solutions). 776
More recent RCTs have suggested that acute PD can achieve similar and acceptable efficacy
and outcomes when compared with extracorporeal RRT; and PD may be associated with less
costs and resource use (Supplementary Tables S85 and S86).765, 767-769, 777

257

Table 43 | Summary of parameters for RRT modalities in adults
SLED

SCUF

CVVH

CVVHD

CVVHDF

PD

QB (ml/min)

300–500

100–300

100–200

80-200

80-200

80-200

N/A

Mechanism for
solute transport

Diffusion*

Diffusion

Convection

Convection

Diffusion

Diffusion &
convection

Diffusion

UFNET (ml/kg/h)

0–15

0–8

0–8

0–3

0–3

0–3

variable

QD (ml/h)

300–500 ml/min

100–300 ml/min

N/A

N/A

250–2000

250–2000

QR (ml/h)

Variable in HDF

0

N/A

250–4000

0

250–4000

1–2 l per
exchange
0

CLUrea (ml/min)

200–350

80–90

1–5

25–33

25–33

25–33

15-25

Main access

Central vein

Central vein

Central vein

Central vein

Central vein

Peritoneal cavity

Need for
anticoagulation

Usually but not
absolutely
necessary

Usually but not
absolutely
necessary

Usually but not
absolutely
necessary
Less but may
occur in case of
treatment
interruptions

Usually but not
absolutely
necessary
Less but may
occur in case of
treatment
interruptions

Usually but not
absolutely
necessary
Less but may
occur in case of
treatment
interruptions

AF
T

IHD

Central vein or
peripheral vein
Usually but not
absolutely
necessary

No

D
R

Fluctuations of
osmotically
+++
++
+
No
active
substances
Effect on ICP in
patients with
Potentially
Potentially
Less than with
Less than with
Less than with
Less than with
Usually no
acute brain
increased
increased
IHD
IHD
IHD
IHD
change
injury
*Diffusion ± convection when used with hemodiafiltration (HDF). CLUrea, ureal clearance; CVVH, continuous venovenous hemofiltration; CVVHD,
continuous venovenous hemodialysis; CVVHDF, continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration; ICP, intracranial pressure; IHD; intermittent hemodialysis;
N/A, not applicable; PD, peritoneal dialysis; QB, blood flow rate; QD, dialysis flow rate; QR, replacement fluid rate; RRT, renal replacement therapy;
SCUF, slow continuous ultrafiltration; SLED; sustained low-efficiency dialysis; UFNET, net ultrafiltration

258

Certainty of evidence
The certainty of evidence among critically ill adults for selection of initial RRT
modality for the treatment of AKI is mostly low to moderate for comparisons of different
pairs of modalities. The comparison of CRRT versus IRRT has moderate certainty of
evidence,764 with downgrading mortality and recovery of kidney function due to
methodological concerns of the studies and downgrading of time on RRT due to imprecision.
The comparison of IHD and PD has low certainty of evidence,764, 765 with
downgrading of mortality and recovery of kidney function for methodological concerns and
sparseness of studies, but upgrading since network meta-analysis was concordant with the
findings of the single study; time on RRT was downgraded for a lack of direct comparisons
(conclusion was based on network meta-analysis), but with upgrading for a large effect size.

AF
T

The comparison of CRRT versus PD also had low certainty of evidence,764 with
downgrading of time on RRT for methodological concerns, downgrading of mortality for
both methodological concerns and inconsistency across studies, and downgrading of
recovery of kidney function for methodological concerns, inconsistency, and imprecision.
The certainty of evidence for time on RRT was moderate, but the overall assessment was low
certainty of evidence since the certainty for mortality was low.

D

R

Values and preferences
This recommendation recognizes the high value and importance that patients and
their surrogate decision-makers convey to evidence-based practices that foster resolution of
AKI, shorter duration of RRT, and recovery to RRT independence. Resolution of AKI has
implications for risk of long-term dialysis dependence, which can contribute to impaired
quality-of-life, social disruption, loss of work productivity and independent living, and can
be perceived as a burden to patients, including adults who commenced RRT during
childhood, caregivers and surrogate decision-makers.740, 778, 779 Achieving freedom from RRT
was perceived as important to patients and associated with greater health-related quality-oflife.780-782
Resource use and costs
RRT is generally resource intensive and expensive. Acute care RRT programs,
particularly CRRT or RRT in ICU settings, generally demand specialized training and
infrastructure, which may not be widely available. Studies have suggested IRRT may be
associated with lower costs,783, 784 due largely to greater disposable costs for CRRT (e.g.,
circuits, anticoagulation, replacement solutions).763 However, RRT-specific costs are contextspecific and variable and further depend on local procurement and practices.763 Acute PD is
more cost effective compared with continuous or intermittent RRT, particularly when
supported by evidence of shorter duration of RRT and ICU length of stay.785-787 Acute PD is
a suitable and important option for selected populations (e.g., children with AKI) and in lowresource settings where CRRT and IRRT may not be available.771, 776, 788, 789
259

AF
T

Considerations for implementation
While there is a spectrum of RRT modalities that can be employed to support acutely
and critically ill patients with severe AKI with indications for RRT, the real-world
implementation of a spectrum of modalities can be challenging. The key factor influencing
the availability of selected RRT modalities is equitable access to resources, where low-to
middle-resource settings may have limited access to some forms of RRT or, more
specifically, to more expensive and resource intensive RRT modalities, or may not have
available resources or infrastructure.788, 790 This may necessitate procedures to organize
transfer of acutely ill children or adults, if feasible, to settings where acute RRT services can
be provided (Practice Point 5.1.2). The Saving Young Lives program has focused on enabling
provision of simple acute PD (low cost, no electricity or complex equipment) for acutely ill
patients in low-resource settings.788 This has included education, training, and mentoring of
healthcare professionals and serves as a model to broaden access to acute PD globally in lowresource settings.790 Several practice points for the provision of acute PD have been
integrated into the 2020 International Society of Peritoneal Dialysis (ISPD) clinical practice
guidelines.776 Implementation of the Saving Young Lives or similar programs should integrate
monitoring and data capture aligned with quality improvement methodology.791

R

Rationale
Evidence from RCTs has shown no differences in mortality or RRT dependence with
intermittent RRT, including PIRRT), versus CRRT; however, not all comparative trials have
been restricted to treatment of patients with hemodynamic instability, and some trials
excluded such patients. Evidence from RCTs has shown a shorter duration of RRT with acute
PD versus CRRT or IHD, with no differences in mortality or RRT dependence.

D

Healthcare professionals providing RRT for AKI should appreciate the advantages
and limitations of each modality and tailor treatment according to the specific needs of each
patient. RRT modality choice should also be informed by the available resources and local
expertise.
Practice Point: 5.2.2: CRRT is preferable to conventional IRRT for critically ill
children and adults with AKI and acute brain injury or other causes or risks of
increased intracranial pressure (ICP) or cerebral edema.
Patients with acute brain injury or cerebral edema may be susceptible to secondary
insults that can further compromise cerebral perfusion, exacerbate cerebral edema, and
extend existing injury,792-794 especially in the penumbra surrounding the acute injury where
brain tissue may be recoverable. Patients treated with RRT, particularly IRRT, are
susceptible to intradialytic hypotension and rapid shifts in serum solute concentration and
osmolality.795 Treatment with IRRT in patients with acute brain injury can alter ICP and
provoke new or worsening cerebral edema, the degree of which correlates with the frequency
260

of therapy and ultrafiltration.796 CRRT may be better suited to mitigate rapid fluctuations in
solute clearance or fluid removal and reduce the risk of exacerbating cerebral edema. Indeed,
acute changes in brain density consistent with new or worsening cerebral edema have been
shown to be more likely among patients receiving conventional IHD compared with
CRRT.797 Alternatively, PD may serve as a suitable option for selected adult patients with
brain injury, particularly if there are contraindications to systemic anticoagulation. There is
limited evidence that has directly compared CRRT and PIRRT in patients with brain injury
or acute liver failure and the risk of disequilibrium syndrome and worsening neurological
profile. In circumstances where CRRT or acute PD is not feasible or available, the
prescription for RRT should be carefully adapted to minimize the risk of intradialytic
hypotension and rapid solute clearance associated with shifts in serum osmolality (Table 44).

AF
T

Practice Point 5.2.3: For children and adults with AKI, particularly those requiring
vasoactive support, identify and treat modifiable factors and mitigators of
hemodynamic instability during RRT.

R

Hemodynamic instability during RRT occurs frequently among acute and critically ill
children and adults and may portend greater risk of adverse outcomes, including mortality
and non-recovery of kidney function.757-761 Hemodynamic instability commonly occurs upon
circuit connection and start of RRT.757, 759, 762 Patients with greater illness acuity, those
receiving vasoactive support, patients exposed to high ultrafiltration rates, and neonates and
children (where the extracorporeal volume of the circuit is larger in proportion to total blood
volume) may be more susceptible.762 The use of a passive leg raise (PLR) test in adults and
other dynamic hemodynamic measures can further aid in predicting the risk of intradialytic
hypotension prior to initiation of IRRT.798-800

D

Greater hemodynamic tolerance to IRRT in acute and critical care settings may be
achieved by using strategies to mitigate intradialytic hypotension (Table 44).761, 801 These
strategies can be applied to acute or critically ill patients with AKI upon initiation of IRRT or
following transition to IRRT from CRRT. They have largely been adapted from measures to
prevent intradialytic hypotension among children and adults with kidney failure receiving
maintenance dialysis.802, 803
The risk of hypotension can be further addressed by discontinuation of all
vasodilators or antihypertensive medications and pre-emptive fluid administration before
initiation of RRT. Hyperoncotic albumin solutions may be used in patients with
hypoalbuminemia.804 A further trial is evaluating the role of albumin supplementation to
mitigate the risk of intradialytic hypotension among critically ill adults receiving RRT.805

261

AF
T

Table 44 | Summary of strategies and interventions to mitigate intradialytic hypotension among
adults starting or transitioning to IRRT
Intervention
Description
Patient-specific
Discontinue vasodilator or
Discontinue scheduled anti-hypertensive medications on the day
antihypertensive medications
of transition from CRRT or initial IRRT or discontinue any i.v.
infusions of vasodilator therapy prior to transition from CRRT or
initial IRRT
Supplemental albumin
Give albumin 25% 100 ml i.v. over 15–20 minutes prior to
planned initiation of IRRT (for patients with hypoalbuminemia).
Midodrine
Give a single dose of midodrine 2.5–10 mg po 30 minutes prior to
or during planned initiation of IRRT.
RRT-specific
Lower initial blood flow rate
Initiate IRRT at a lower blood flow rate (QB ~ 100 ml/min) and
(QB)
increase every 2–5 min by increments of 50–100 ml/min to target
blood flow rate.
Lower initial dialysate flow rate
Initiate IRRT at a lower dialysate flow rate (QD 300 ml/min) and
(QD)
titrate to target.
Lower temperature dialysate
Initiate IRRT using an initial dialysate temperature <37.0oC
and/or <0.5oC below measured body temperature.
Higher dialysis sodium
Initiate IRRT using a higher dialysate [Na] (≥145 mmol/l).
concentration
No or low initial ultrafiltration
Initiate IRRT with zero ultrafiltration and titrate to target.
(UF)
CRRT, continuous renal replacement therapy; IRRT, intermittent renal replacement therapy; i.v.,
intravenous; Na, sodium; PIRRT, prolonged intermittent renal replacement therapy; po, oral; RRT,
renal replacement therapy

R

Practice Point 5.2.4: Prolonged IRRT (PIRRT) is an acceptable alternative to CRRT as
the initial RRT modality for hemodynamically unstable, critically ill adults with AKI.

D

PIRRT refers to intermittently applied RRT for periods longer than conventional IHD
(e.g., 6–12 hours). PIRRT, often referred to as SLED or extended daily dialysis (EDD), aims
to realize the theoretical benefits of both CRRT and conventional IHD while mitigating risks,
particularly intradialytic hypotension (Table 44).806-808
Practice Point 5.2.5: Transition from CRRT to IRRT can be considered when children
and adults who have not recovered from AKI are physiologically and metabolically able
to tolerate IRRT and the risks of intracranial hypertension or cerebral edema, if
applicable, are resolved.
Approaches to transition of patients between RRT modalities during phases of organ
function recovery, particularly CRRT to IHD, have undergone limited evaluation in critically
ill patients with AKI .809-811 A period of receipt of IHD is common following CRRT,
occurring in 36%–50% of instances, usually after hemodynamic stability has been achieved
and care is focused on rehabilitation and mobilization.809, 810 Several patient factors predict
intolerance to transition to IRRT and IHD, including hypoalbuminemia, ongoing fluid
262

accumulation, oliguria, use of vasopressors, and use of mechanical ventilation, which can
guide decision-making about the appropriate timing. 761
5.3. RRT dose-intensity
Recommendation 5.3.1: We recommend delivering an effluent volume of 20-25 ml/kg/h
over higher volumes for solute clearance in adults receiving CRRT, or a Kt/V of 3.9 per
week over higher urea clearance in adults receiving IRRT or PIRRT for AKI (1B).

AF
T

This recommendation places a high value on minimizing harms and unnecessary resource
use and costs associated with augmented (higher) RRT dose-intensity to achieve greater
small solute clearance. While earlier RCTs implied there may be a survival benefit with
augmented RRT dose-intensity in critical illness, more recent RCTs, including 2 large
multicenter RCTs and several systematic reviews have found no improvement in outcomes
with augmented (higher) RRT dose-intensity of solute clearance over standard dose-intensity
in acute and critically ill participants with AKI. Current evidence suggests that standard
dose-intensity may contribute to fewer days of RRT compared with receipt of higher RRT
dose-intensity, with no differences in mortality or long-term RRT dependence.

D

R

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
This recommendation has not changed since the KDIGO 2012 Guideline.608 The
current evidence demonstrates that augmented (higher) RRT dose-intensity (e.g., CRRT
dose-intensity ≥35 ml/kg/h; daily sessions of SLED/IRRT targeting a Kt/V ≥1.2) does not
improve outcomes compared with a lower RRT dose-intensity (e.g., CRRT dose-intensity
20–25 ml/kg/h or thrice weekly of SLED/IRRT targeting a Kt/V ≥1.2), in terms of improved
survival or greater likelihood of resolution of AKI and RRT independence. Moreover,
augmented RRT dose-intensity may contribute to RRT-associated morbidity. Secondary
analyses of RCTs have suggested that augmented RRT dose-intensity may propagate oliguria
and extend total dialysis treatment time.812, 813 Augmented RRT dose-intensity may increase
the risk of cardiac arrhythmias, contribute to hypophosphatemia and electrolyte losses, 814, 815
and increase the risk of delayed weaning from invasive mechanical ventilation, 815, 816 or risk
of reintubation.814, 816 These findings suggest there is no incremental benefit to augmented
RRT dose-intensity beyond the lower standards used in prior RCTs.812, 815, 817-820
Several small retrospective studies from Japan have evaluated the association of
lower-than-standard CRRT dose-intensity (CRRT dose-intensity 10–20 ml/kg/h) with
metabolic control and outcomes.821-825 These studies have suggested that lower CRRT doseintensity can be tolerated and achieve comparable efficacy for electrolyte, acid-base, and
metabolic control as the current standard; however, the comparative effectiveness of this
lower dose-intensity on clinical outcomes has not been proven in RCTs. In select
jurisdictions (e.g., Japan), lower RRT dose-intensity is routinely delivered and

263

recommended.821-825 There are ongoing RCTs evaluating whether lower RRT dose-intensity
can impact survival and resolution of AKI and dialysis dependence.826-828
Certainty of evidence
Based on evidence current for the KDIGO 2012 Guideline,608 there was moderate
certainty of evidence overall, with moderate certainty regarding mortality, which was
downgraded for inconsistency across studies, and high certainty of evidence for RRT
dependence (duration of RRT or to kidney function recovery)

AF
T

Values and preferences
This recommendation recognizes the importance of adopting the standard RRT doseintensity to minimize harm, reduce practice variation, and mitigate adverse effects that may
be incrementally associated with augmented RRT dose-intensity. The current standard RRT
dose-intensity may contribute to fewer days of RRT compared with receipt of higher RRT
dose-intensity, which is perceived as important to patients and associated with greater healthrelated quality-of-life.780-782
Resource use and costs
Augmented RRT dose-intensity is a low-value practice that is currently not supported
by evidence. Moreover, the routine use of excess RRT dose-intensity may contribute to the
risk of adverse events, greater use of RRT disposables, higher bedside workload, increased
healthcare costs, and a higher burden on the environment. As such, the current standard RRT
dose-intensity will use less resources and translate into relatively lower costs.

D

R

Considerations for implementation
Abundant evidence suggests RRT dose-intensity is poorly monitored and susceptible
to wide practice variation.713, 829, 830 The real-world implementation of RRT dose-intensity
standards should align and be integrated with quality improvement initiatives aimed at
establishing and sustaining high-quality acute RRT programs.743, 791, 831-833 RRT doseintensity is an important quality and performance indicator of acute RRT adequacy.834 In a
single centre quality improvement initiative, Griffin et al. aimed to standardize CRRT doseintensity and reduce practice variation.832 The primary outcome was percentage of weekly
CRRT delivered that was concordant with the guideline-directed standard (20–25 ml/kg/h).
The baseline concordance was 33%; however, following implementation, compliance
increased to 66% over a near two-year period with a substantial reduction in week-to-week
variation.
Rationale
RRT dose-intensity is focused on small solute clearance and the correction of
complications related to derangements in electrolytes, acid-base balance, or metabolic waste
products. The optimal RRT dose-intensity for acutely ill patients with AKI across the
spectrum of illness is unknown. Further, the methods used for RRT dose quantification in
264

patients with AKI have several limitations and have not been fully validated in this
population.
RCTs to date have generally compared augmented (higher) and standard (lower) RRT
dose-intensity regimens.815, 819, 835-837 While earlier RCTs implied there may be a survival
benefit with augmented RRT dose-intensity in critical illness,836, 837 subsequent RCTs,
including 2 large multicenter RCTs and several systematic reviews have found no
improvement in outcomes with augmented RRT dose-intensity in acute and critically ill
participants with AKI.812, 815, 817, 818, 820, 835 While most RCTs have predominantly included
participants receiving CRRT, 3 RCTs had significant proportions receiving IRRT or focused
solely on IRRT.820, 838-840

AF
T

In all these RCTs that focused on RRT dose-intensity, dosing regimens (augmented
vs. standard) have generally been fixed and not adapted or modified after initial stabilization
of acid-base, electrolyte, or metabolic derangements. Whether a strategy of personalized
RRT dose-intensity modification can favorably impact clinical outcomes is unknown.
Practice Point 5.3.1: An initial CRRT dose-intensity for adults with high body mass
index (BMI; e.g., ≥30 kg/m2) based on ideal or adjusted body weight, rather than actual
body weight, can be used to avoid delivery of excess CRRT dose-intensity.

D

R

To date, the preferred reference “weight” (i.e., actual, adjusted, ideal) to calculate the
prescribed RRT dose-intensity across the spectrum of BMI encountered in clinical practice is
uncertain. In the Veterans Affairs (VA)/National Institute of Health (NIH) Acute Renal
Failure Trial Network (ATN) trial, premorbid obesity was considered in the CRRT doseintensity calculation.820 In non-obese participants, the CRRT dose-intensity prescription was
“based on the weight before the onset of acute illness”; however, in obese participants,
defined as a weight exceeding 30% ideal body weight, the prescription was adjusted,
calculated as ideal body weight plus 25% of the difference between ideal and actual weight
before the onset of acute illness. In addition, participants weighing >120 kg were excluded.820
In the Randomized Evaluation of Normal versus Augmented Level (RENAL) trial, the
prescribed CRRT dose-intensity was “based on the patient’s body weight at the time of
randomization” and participants weighing <60 kg or >100 kg were excluded.815
A recent retrospective cohort study of 1033 critically ill patients receiving CRRT
evaluated the association between measures of body weight (i.e., actual, adjusted, ideal),
CRRT dose-intensity, and outcome.841 Ideal body weight was calculated using the Devine
formula (males: 50 kg + [2.3 kg × each inch over 60 inches]; females: 45.5 kg + [2.3 kg ×
each inch over 60 inches]).842 Adjusted body weight was calculated as ([actual body weight–
ideal body weight] × 0.4) + ideal body weight.841 The cohort was stratified by BMI ≥30
kg/m2 and CRRT dose-intensity was further indexed by actual body weight, adjusted body
weight and ideal body weight. The mean (standard deviation [SD]) CRRT dose-intensity
265

varied significantly across measures of body weight, particularly among patients with BMI
≥30 kg/m2 (Table 45).
Table 45 | Summary of varying CRRT dose-intensity stratified by BMI and body weight
calculation
CRRT dose-intensity (ml/kg/h)
BMI <30 kg/m2
BMI ≥30 kg/m2
Actual body weight, (mean [SD])
30 (9)
27 (7)
Ideal body weight, (mean [SD])
37 (10)
48 (14)
Adjusted body weight, (mean [SD])
33 (9)
36 (9)
p<0.001 for each comparison. BMI, body mass index; CRRT, continuous renal replacement therapy;
SD, standard deviation. Adapted from Peters et al841

AF
T

There was suggestion of effect modification of CRRT dose-intensity for mortality by
measures of body weight. Among obese patients, higher CRRT dose-intensity calculated by
actual and adjusted body weight was associated with greater mortality; however, there was
no association with mortality when ideal body weight was used.843
These observations have implications for CRRT dose-intensity prescribing among
patients who are obese (BMI ≥30 kg/m2) and/or have actual body weights exceeding 100–120
kg, who were not represented in landmark trials guiding CRRT dose-intensity.815, 820 For
patients with a high BMI, the calculation of the initial prescribed CRRT dose-intensity based
on ideal or adjusted body weight rather than actual body weight may avoid delivery of excess
CRRT dose-intensity.841 The CRRT dose-intensity can thereafter be adjusted for adequacy
and correction of electrolyte, acid-base and metabolic (e.g., nitrogenous waste) derangements.

R

Recommendation 5.3.2: We recommend not prescribing high-volume hemofiltration
(HVHF) compared with standard CRRT dose-intensity for critically ill adults with AKI
in the setting of sepsis or septic shock (1B).

D

This recommendation places high value on avoiding potential harms and costs in the absence
of any evidence of benefit with HVHF. Compared with standard CRRT dose-intensity (total
effluent fluid volume 20-25 ml/kg/h), HVHF (total effluent fluid volume ≥45 ml/kg/h) does not
improve mortality or kidney recovery, or reduce serious adverse events and may increase the
risk of metabolic complications and excessive clearance of nutrients and medications.
Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
Pooled evidence from systematic reviews of RCTs has found no evidence for benefit
of HVHF compared with standard CRRT dose-intensity for any clinical outcomes, including
mortality and kidney recovery.844, 845 A small RCT of 20 critically ill participants with septic
shock randomly allocated to CRRT at 35 ml/kg/h or 65 ml/kg/h found no significant
difference in any clinical outcome measured.846 In a single center RCT in China, 280
critically ill participants with sepsis and AKI were randomly allocated to receive CRRT at 50
266

ml/kg/h (HVHF) or 85 ml/kg/h (extra HVHF).847 There was no evidence of differences in
survival or resolution of AKI between the 2 HVHF groups, respectively. In the multicenter
hIgh VOlume in Intensive Care (IVOIRE) trial, 140 critically ill participants with septic
shock and AKI were randomly allocated to 96 hours of CRRT at 70 ml/kg/h (HVHF) or 35
ml/kg/h.848 The trial was terminated prematurely for futility with no evidence for differences
in early improvement in organ function or organ support or in the primary outcome of 28-day
mortality. In the Hemofiltration to Rescue Severe Shock following Cardiac Surgery
(HEROICS) trial, focused on 224 post-cardiac surgery participants with vasoplegic shock, of
whom >40% were receiving ECLS, randomization to a strategy of 48 hours of CRRT at 80
ml/kg/h (HVHF) followed by standard CRRT compared with standard of care (where only
57% received CRRT) did not improve time to shock resolution, AKI resolution, or
survival.718

AF
T

Systematic review of RCTs has found no evidence for benefit of HVHF compared
with standard CRRT dose-intensity for any clinical outcomes, including mortality and kidney
recovery (Supplementary Table S87).814, 817, 849-852 Twelve trials conducted in critically ill
adults consistently found no significant difference between intensive and less intensive
(standard) CRRT dose for 30-day mortality (RR: 0.95; 95% CI: 0.85–1.05), with similar
findings among trials that defined intensive CRRT as either ≥40 ml/kg/h (RR: 0.98; 95% CI:
0.86 –1.11) or ≥45 ml/kg/h (RR: 0.93; 95% CI: 0.83–1.06). Smaller numbers of trials also
found no significant differences in likelihood of 30-day complete resolution, or hospital or
ICU length of stay. A single trial reported no significant differences in serious adverse
events.851

D

R

In addition to lack of benefit, there is concern that exposure to HVHF may be
associated with risk of adverse events, including the undue clearance of electrolytes,
nutrients, and medications (e.g., antimicrobials). In the HEROICS trial, more participants in
the HVHF arm experienced hypophosphatemia, metabolic alkalosis, and
thrombocytopenia.718 Moreover, those allocated to the HVFH group had longer median
durations of RRT (5 days vs. 2 days, P<0.0001).
Certainty of evidence
There was moderate certainty of evidence for lack of efficacy of HVFH versus
standard dose-intensity CRRT in adults. The certainty of evidence was downgraded for
mortality and complete resolution for some methodological concerns across studies. The
certainty of evidence for serious adverse events was very low due to methodological
concerns and sparseness of evidence. Sub analyses of studies comparing either HVHF with
≥45 or ≥40 ml/kg/h were further downgraded for imprecision.
Values and preferences
This recommendation places high value on avoiding a low-value practice, both from
the perspective of the patient and the healthcare system, where HVHF has not been proven to
267

improve clinical outcomes, may be associated with uncertain risk, and likely contributes to
greater health resource use and associated costs.
Resource use and costs
The use of HVHF can plausibly increase bedside workload for nursing and other
personnel due to the need for more frequent changes to replacement/dialysate solution bags
and added requirements for electrolyte supplementation. This translates into greater costs for
disposables, medications, and nursing time.

AF
T

Considerations for implementation
The practice of prescribing higher than guideline-directed CRRT dose-intensity
remains common despite no evidence of improvement in outcomes.713, 829, 830 There is no role
for HVHF in routine clinical practice beyond enrollment in a RCT in critically ill patients
with shock states.
Rationale
Several RCTs have explored whether HVHF can more rapidly restore organ
dysfunction (i.e., hemodynamic stability) and improve outcomes.718, 846-848, 853, 854 These trials
have largely focused on critically ill patients with sepsis or following cardiac surgery. Based
on currently available evidence, there is no rationale for treating patients with HVHF outside
a clinical trial.

R

Practice Point 5.3.2: The adequacy of the RRT dose-intensity to correct for electrolyte,
acid-base, and metabolic (e.g., nitrogenous waste) derangements should be reviewed
daily for CRRT and prior to starting each RRT session for IRRT and the prescription
adjusted when needed.

D

Review of a patient’s clinical, physiological, and laboratory values, including
checking for resolution of AKI, is important before prescribing RRT. For patients who are
receiving CRRT or PD, these variables can be reviewed daily (or more often).791, 834 For
patients receiving IRRT, these variables can be reviewed prior to each scheduled session.
CRRT dose-intensity, a surrogate for small solute clearance, is represented by total
effluent volume (i.e., replacement fluid + dialysate fluid + ultrafiltration) normalized for
patient weight and treatment time (Table 46).855

268

Table 46 | Summary of calculation of CRRT dose-intensity across CRRT modes855
CRRT mode
Calculation of total effluent volume rate (ml/h)
CVVH
Sum of total replacement fluid rate (ml/h) + fluid removal rate (ml/h)
CVVHD
Sum of dialysate fluid rate (ml/h) + fluid removal rate (ml/h)
CVVHDF
Sum of replacement fluid rate (ml/h) + dialysate fluid rate (ml/h) + fluid
removal rate (ml/h)
Total replacement fluid rate = prefilter replacement fluid rate (ml/h) + postfilter replacement fluid
rate. Calculation of the dilution due to prefilter replacement fluid = plasma flow rate (ml/h)/(plasma
flow rate [ml/h] + prefilter replacement fluid rate [ml/h]). CRRT, continuous renal replacement
therapy; CVVH, continuous venovenous hemofiltration, CVVHD, continuous venovenous
hemodialysis; CVVHDF, continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration.

AF
T

Evidence from clinical trials, observational studies, and surveys of practice have
found that the delivered RRT dose-intensity for solute clearance is often lower than the
prescribed dose.815, 839, 856-861 This discrepancy can be attributed to reduction in hemofilter
efficiency and function over time, which may correlate with increases in transmembrane
pressure indicating filter clogging. Other reasons include therapy disruptions from alarms
that suspend the blood flow pump (e.g., catheter dysfunction or high-pressure alarms),
scheduled changes to replacement solutions, hemofilter/circuit loss due to clotting or
scheduled change, and other unplanned interruptions (e.g., downtime for diagnostic imaging;
transfer to operating theatre, etc.). For these reasons, the KDIGO 2012 Guideline
recommended that a higher effluent volume should be prescribed to deliver the recommended
effluent volume.608

D

R

In IRRT, Kt/V is a measure used to quantify dialysis adequacy, defined as the blood
clearance of urea (K), multiplied by the treatment time (t), divided by the volume of
distribution for urea in the body (V). The urea reduction ratio (URR) has also been used as a
measure of adequacy of an IRRT session, defined as the percentage difference between the
blood urea concentration before and after a dialysis session. Early clinical studies in patients
receiving maintenance dialysis found a dose-gradient relationship with mortality, whereby
increasing dose-intensity increased survival to an upper boundary of a Kt/V 1.3 and URR
70%, beyond which no further improvement was evident.862, 863 Clinical practice guidelines
for maintenance hemodialysis recommend delivering a Kt/V 1.2 thrice per week. 864 In AKI,
the recommended dose-intensity for IHD is extrapolated from these recommendations but
has undergone limited validation.862
Discrepancy between prescribed and delivered dose-intensity has also been shown in
patients receiving IRRT. The lower delivered than prescribed dose-intensity is associated
with use of temporary vascular catheters necessitating reduced blood flow rates, and no
anticoagulation use contributing to filter clotting.
Recent advances in IRRT platforms have enabled online clearance monitoring. 865
Online clearance monitoring uses conductivity measurements of the dialysate to estimate
Kt/V, by measuring the difference in conductivity between the dialysate entering and exiting
269

the dialyzer, which is related to the concentration of sodium ions (as a surrogate for urea).
Although online clearance monitoring can provide a non-invasive, real-time method for
assessing IRRT adequacy, the Kt/V estimated by this method has been shown to
underestimate the delivered Kt/V.865, 866
Practice Point 5.3.3: When using acute PD for adults with AKI, deliver a weekly Kt/V
of 2.2 (18-24 l PD fluid/day) over higher doses.

AF
T

The Work Group concurs with the guidance on prescribing and achieving adequate
clearance in acute PD that were specifically addressed in the 2020 updated International
Society for Peritoneal Dialysis (ISPD) guidelines for PD in AKI (Adults).776 Acute PD
delivered at a dose-intensity targeted to achieve a weekly Kt/V of 2.2 (18-24 l PD fluid per
day) can achieve comparable metabolic control (i.e., urea, creatinine, bicarbonate, potassium,
sodium concentrations), duration of therapy, and mortality to that of extracorporeal RRT and
higher intensity PD.

R

In a single center RCT from 2008, Gabriel et al. compared high-volume PD (36-44 l
PD fluid/24 hours–delivered Kt/V 3.6) with daily IHD (Kt/V 4.7) in 120 critically ill
participants with AKI.768 Metabolic control (i.e., urea, creatinine, bicarbonate, potassium,
sodium, glucose) and mortality [58% vs. 53%, P=0.71] was similar; however, participants
treated with high-volume PD had shorter duration of therapy (5.5 days vs. 7.5 days, P=0.02)
and earlier resolution of AKI (7.2 days vs. 10.6 days, P=0.04) compared with daily IHD. An
RCT comparing lower dose-intensity PD (18-24 l PD fluid/day during the first 2 days;
delivered weekly Kt/V of 2.11) with IHD thrice per week (delivered weekly Kt/V of 2.81)
found no difference in outcome. A multicenter RCT compared acute lower dose-intensity PD
(18–24 l/day) with IRRT among participants with AKI and found no significant differences
in 28-day mortality or RRT-free survival between groups.765

D

Several studies have also applied lower-volume PD with acceptable results.867-870 In a
single center RCT, Ponce et al. randomly allocated 61 critically ill participants to high (Kt/V
0.8 per session) versus low dose-intensity PD (Kt/V 0.5 per session).869 Metabolic control,
duration of therapy, and mortality were similar, implying a lower Kt/V target could be
applied. This translates into lower fluid volumes use, fewer resources, and lower costs. In
another single center RCT, 75 acutely ill participants with AKI were allocated either to lower
dose-intensity PD (<20 l PD fluid/day; delivered Kt/V 2.26) or higher dose-intensity PD (>30
l PD fluid/day; delivered Kt/V 3.30) using a single-bag open system (1.5 l PD fluid) for the
first 2 days.870 There were no significant differences in metabolic control, hospital mortality
(72% vs. 63%, P=0.8), or resolution of AKI; however, those allocated to higher doseintensity PD had a trend towards more peritonitis (15.3% vs. 8.3%, P=0.34). Whether acute
PD is as effective as standard extracorporeal RRT dose-intensity among patients with marked
hypercatabolic or shock states with splanchnic hypoperfusion is unknown.

270

873

AF
T

Delivering a standard dose-intensity of acute PD is a feasible, safe, and comparably
effective form of acute RRT that can extend treatment options for patients with AKI in lowresource settings or among selected populations where conventional extracorporeal RRT is
less feasible or practically challenging. If acute PD is the only option available to patients
with severe AKI confronted with severe electrolyte, acid-base, metabolic, and fluids
complications, it can be lifesaving.788, 790, 871-873 Using standard dose-intensity acute PD also
necessitates fewer resources and can realize cost savings when compared to extracorporeal
RRT and higher dose-intensity PD that requires greater volumes of PD solutions and more
intensive nursing support for delivery.777, 867 In general, acute PD requires less infrastructure
(i.e., water; electricity), simpler training for healthcare personnel, and can be performed
using less resources and costs.777, 867 This makes acute PD using standard dose-intensity an
appealing choice for implementation in low-resource settings, where it has been proven
feasible and effective through initiatives such as the Saving Young Lives program.788, 790, 871-

Practice Point 5.3.4: In adults with AKI, the initial PD prescription, including duration
of cycle time and glucose concentration of PD fluid, may need to be modified to rapidly
correct acid-base, electrolyte, metabolic, or fluid complications in adults with AKI.

D

R

The Work Group concurred with the guidance regarding the initial prescription and
delivery of acute PD among adults with AKI that was detailed in the 2020 updated ISPD
guidelines for PD in AKI (Adults) (Figure 16).776 In adults with AKI, the initial PD
prescription, including, duration of cycle time and glucose concentration of PD fluid, may
need to be modified to rapidly correct acid-base, electrolyte, metabolic, or fluid
complications in adults with AKI, particularly in critically ill or hypermetabolic patients. To
achieve target fluid removal during the initial prescription, variable glucose-containing PD
fluid and/or shorter cycle times may be used. The cycle time can then be extended and
modified based on patient and clinical circumstances (4-6 hours).

271

AF
T

Figure 16 | Suggested algorithm for use of acute PD among adult patients with AKI.
AKI, acute kidney injury; HS, Hartmanns solution; MRL, modified Ringers lactate; PD,
peritoneal dialysis. Reproduced from Cullis et al776.

D

R

Automated PD using 25 l/day with 70% tidal volume in adults with AKI is
approximately equivalent to a CRRT effluent volume of 23–24 ml/kg/h. This estimate of
dose equivalence was derived from a single RCT including 125 critically ill adults with AKI
in whom tidal acute PD (25 l PD fluid/day; fill volume 2.0 l; tidal volume 70%) was
compared with continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF; prescribed total
effluent fluid rate 30 ml/kg/h).767 Survival (69.8% vs. 46.8%, P<0.01), AKI resolution
(60.3% vs. 35.5%, P<0.01) and infectious complications (9.5% vs. 17.7%, P<0.01) were
significantly better in those allocated to acute tidal automated PD compared with CVVHDF.
The delivered CVVHDF dose-intensity was 23.5 ml/kg/h.608, 776
5.4 Catheters for RRT
Practice Point 5.4.1: Vascular access for RRT, including type, size, length, and site of
catheter placement, should consider feasibility and weigh the risks of catheter
colonization/infection or bleeding with the desire to maintain catheter/circuit patency in
children and adults.

272

The selection of dialysis catheters for acute RRT in critically ill children and adults
should be guided by a balance between the feasibility of insertion, the risk of complications
(e.g., catheter colonization, infection, and bleeding), and the need to maintain circuit patency
and achieve adequate blood flow. In acute settings, nontunneled, uncuffed catheters are
recommended due to their ease of insertion, immediate usability, and suitability for shortterm use. This is particularly relevant in ICU settings, where rapid initiation of therapy is
often required. Cuffed tunneled catheters are not typically necessary unless prolonged RRT
access is anticipated or a transition to chronic maintenance dialysis is planned for patients
with AKI superimposed on advanced CKD.608, 820
The right internal jugular vein is preferred for catheter placement in both children and
adults.874 This site provides the most direct route to the superior vena cava and right atrium,

AF
T

reducing the risk of catheter malfunction, kinking, and malposition.875 Additionally, the right
internal jugular vein is associated with lower rates of catheter-related bloodstream infection
and thrombosis compared to other sites.876
The subclavian vein should be avoided, particularly in adults, due to the high risk of
central venous stenosis, which can compromise future vascular access options. This is critical
for patients who may later require longer-term or chronic maintenance dialysis.820, 877 In
children, central venous stenosis also occurs after central line placement, but reported rates
are generally lower and are influenced by factors such as the number and type of catheters,
device size, and prior central venous access exposure.878-880 Femoral access may be
considered when internal jugular access is not feasible, although it carries a higher risk of
infection, particularly in obese or immobilized patients.877, 881

D

R

For adults, catheters of at least 12 French (F) in size are recommended to allow
sufficient blood flow rates (ideally ≥200–250 ml/min) and reduce the risk of circuit clotting
or inadequate RRT delivery.608, 820 Adequate blood flow is essential for effective solute
clearance, ultrafiltration, and anticoagulation management. Catheter length should be tailored
based on insertion site to ensure the catheter tip reaches the cavoatrial junction for right or
left internal jugular approach and inferior vena cava for femoral access. Peres et al. proposed
formulas based on patient height and insertion site to estimate optimal catheter length, which
were later validated by Czepizak et al. with 90%–97% accuracy.882, 883 Optimal lengths
include 15 cm for right internal jugular placement, 20 cm for left internal jugular, and 20–25
cm for femoral placement (Table 47). Correct tip placement minimizes recirculation, reduces
the risk of mechanical dysfunction, and ensures efficient RRT delivery.
There are no universal French size cutoff values for pediatric dialysis catheters. Size
selection should be proportional to patient weight and vessel diameter to ensure adequate
blood flow while minimizing the risk of vascular injury (Table 48).884, 885

273

Confirming proper catheter tip position is generally recommended, ideally at the
cavoatrial junction for internal jugular catheters or within the inferior vena cava for femoral
access. While chest roentgenography remains the most used method, emerging techniques
such as ultrasound-guided tip visualization or intracardiac electrocardiogram-guided can
enhance tip confirmation in select settings.886-889
Table 47 | Peres’ formulas for determining catheter length in adults 882, 883
Site
Formula
Accuracy
Right internal jugular
Height/10 cm
90%
Left internal jugular
Height/10+4 cm
94%
Right subclavian
Height/10-2 cm
96%
Left subclavian
Height/10+2 cm
97%

AF
T

Table 48 | Common pediatric dialysis catheter sizes based on child weight 875, 890, 891
Patient weight (kg)
Catheter size (French)
Notes
<5
4.5–6
Use the smallest size to fit the
vessel; single lumen dual
access can be used
5–15
7–8
Infants/small children
15–30
8–10
Children
>30
10–12
Adolescents

Practice Point 5.4.2: Adoption of standardized care bundles for dialysis catheter
insertion and maintenance can reduce the risk of complications.

D

R

Uncuffed non-tunneled dialysis catheters are essential for timely initiation of acute
RRT, but they carry a risk of complications and dysfunction that may impair RRT
effectiveness and negatively impact patient outcomes.875 These complications are broadly
classified into early and late events and are often preventable with use of standardized care
bundles for catheter insertion and maintenance.892, 893 Early catheter dysfunction typically
occurs within the first hours to days following insertion and is most often due to technical
factors, such as suboptimal catheter placement, incorrect positioning of the catheter tip, or
mechanical kinking.875, 894 Misplacement may lead to inadequate blood flow, significant
recirculation, or failure to deliver adequate dialysis dose-intensity. The use of ultrasound and
real-time imaging guidance, along with strict adherence to insertion protocols, can
substantially reduce these risks.886-889
Late catheter dysfunction commonly results from intrinsic or extrinsic obstruction,
including thrombus formation at the catheter tip or within the vessel, and fibrin or biofilm
sheath formation. These obstructions impair circuit flow and often necessitate catheter
exchange.875 Catheter-related bloodstream infections represent a major late complication,
contributing to increased morbidity, prolonged hospitalization, and mortality.895

274

The KDOQI 2019 Clinical Practice Guidelines for Vascular Access strongly advocate
for the implementation of care bundles, which are structured sets of evidence-based practices
that, when performed collectively and reliably, have been shown to improve outcomes. 875
These bundles typically include use of maximal sterile barriers during insertion,
chlorhexidine for skin antisepsis, daily catheter site assessment, proper hub disinfection,
securement techniques, and timely removal of unnecessary catheters. Implementation of such
standardized care bundles has been demonstrated to reduce catheter-related infections,
improve catheter function, and extend catheter survival (Table 49).895, 896

AF
T

In addition to care bundles, catheter lock solutions are being increasingly explored as
adjunctive measures to reduce catheter-related infections. A recent meta-analysis found that
citrate locks showed a trend toward lower infection and complication rates compared to
heparin or saline.897, 898 Taurolidine-heparin lock solution was associated with a 71% risk
reduction in catheter-related bloodstream infections compared to heparin alone, although
most current evidence is extrapolated from evidence from studies conducted in patients with
tunneled or long-term catheter placement for maintenance dialysis.899, 900

D

R

Table 49 | Summary of the elements in the standard care bundle for non-cuffed dialysis
catheters875
Component
Recommendation
Catheter site selection
Prefer right internal jugular vein for insertion; avoid subclavian vein
to prevent central vein stenosis.
Ultrasound guidance
Use real-time point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) to guide catheter
insertion and confirm placement.
Aseptic technique
Strict maximum sterile barrier precautions during insertion.
Catheter securement
Use sutures or securement device to minimize movement and reduce
infection risk.
Dressing protocol
Apply chlorhexidine-impregnated dressing and change per
institutional policy or when soiled/loose.
Exit site care
Perform regular exit site cleaning with antiseptic solution.
Catheter locking
Use anticoagulant lock (e.g., heparin, citrate) or antimicrobial lock if
infection risk is high.
Documentation & monitoring Document insertion details and monitor daily for signs of infection or
dysfunction.
Timely removal
Remove catheter as soon as no longer needed or if signs of
infection/dysfunction.
Education & training
Ensure staff are trained in insertion, care, and early recognition of
complications.

Practice Point 5.4.3: Use of existing arteriovenous fistulas/grafts may be suitable for
IRRT in children and adults to avoid new dialysis catheter placement.
Practice Point 5.4.4: It is preferable to avoid using existing arteriovenous (AV)
fistulas/grafts for CRRT in children or adults, due to concern for needle dislodgement
or arteriovenous fistulae/graft damage with prolonged cannulation.

275

In the acute care setting, vascular access choice is a vital component of safe and
effective RRT. While existing AV fistulas or AV grafts are preferred for maintenance
hemodialysis due to their durability and lower risk of infection, their role in short term RRT,
particularly CRRT, is more nuanced. For IRRT in hemodynamically stable children and
adults, the use of a well-functioning, mature AV fistula/grafts may be appropriate. This
approach avoids the insertion of a temporary dialysis catheter, thereby reducing the risk of
catheter-associated complications such as infection, bleeding, thrombosis, and venous
stenosis.875, 901 This is especially relevant in patients who are already established on
maintenance hemodialysis or who have a functioning vascular access created in anticipation
of maintenance dialysis initiation.

R

AF
T

In contrast, the routine use of AV fistula/grafts for CRRT is generally not
recommended due to several concerns. The prolonged cannulation necessary for CRRT poses
a significant risk of needle dislodgement, particularly in critically ill, sedated, or agitated
patients who may move unpredictably. The mechanical stress from 24-hour continuous blood
flow through large-bore dialysis needles may contribute to vessel wall trauma or damage to
the anastomosis site, especially in newly created or maturing accesses. Unnikrishnan et al.
showed that venous needle placement during IHD dramatically increases turbulent shear near
the venous anastomosis, wall shear stress fluctuations increased from ~0.1 m/s to 0.4–0.7
m/s, 2 cm downstream of the needle tip, with turbulence intensities 5–6 times higher,
indicating this may contribute potential endothelial injury and intimal hyperplasia and lead to
AV graft complications.902 Existing AV fistula/grafts were not designed for extended
cannulation duration, and frequent manipulation may increase the risk of infection or access
failure, which could jeopardize long-term dialysis options.903 In addition, safe use of AV
access for CRRT would require continuous bedside supervision.904 For these reasons, dialysis
catheters remain the preferred access for CRRT in both children and adults.

D

Practice Point 5.4.5: The decision on how to replace poorly performing uncuffed
nontunneled dialysis catheters should be individualized. The options include a new
venipuncture or, in select cases, a guidewire exchange of the existing dialysis catheter.
The performance of uncuffed nontunneled dialysis catheters is vital for the effective
delivery of RRT. Inadequate blood flow rates or frequent circuit alarms can compromise
dialysis efficiency, lead to treatment interruptions, and increase the risk of thrombosis and
infection.905 When dysfunction is confirmed and cannot be corrected through flushing,
repositioning, or thrombolytic therapy, the catheter should be replaced. This may involve
either a new venipuncture at a different site, which is preferred when feasible to minimize the
risk of infection and mechanical complications, or a guidewire exchange of the existing
catheter, which can be considered in select circumstances, particularly when vascular access
is limited or when the patient is at high procedural risk.876, 906-908

276

The 2011 Centers for Disease Control (CDC)/ Healthcare Infection Control Practices
Advisory Committee (HICPAC) guidelines recommend caution with guidewire exchanges
for central venous catheters, including dialysis catheters, due to the potential for increased
infection risk.909 When infection is suspected, the catheter should be completely removed,
and if further access is required, a new catheter should be inserted at an alternative
anatomical site.

AF
T

Guidewire exchange may be appropriate in selected cases of non-infectious
dysfunction, particularly when vascular access is limited or new venipuncture carries
elevated risk.876, 906, 908 In such cases, the procedure should be performed using strict aseptic
technique. Additionally, if infection is suspected, the removed catheter tip should be
submitted for microbiological analysis to aid diagnosis and guide treatment.877, 909 Across all
scenarios, adherence to standardized sterile protocols during catheter removal, replacement,
or exchange remains essential to minimize infection risk and ensure safe vascular access
management.875, 896
Practice Point 5.4.6: Do not perform routine or scheduled change of dialysis catheters
to reduce the risk of catheter-related infection.

D

R

Multiple RCTs and observational studies have demonstrated that prophylactic
catheter changes do not reduce infection rates compared to leaving catheters in place until no
longer needed or a complication arises.877, 910 Moreover, routine scheduled replacement
introduces additional procedural risks, including mechanical complications such as arterial
puncture, hematoma/bleeding, or pneumothorax, particularly in patients with coagulopathy;
loss of available vascular access sites, especially in patients with limited central venous
access options; and greater procedural burden and healthcare costs.876, 909 These potential
harms are particularly significant in critically ill patients, who often have impaired
coagulation and require multiple concurrent therapies through central venous access.
However, there are context-specific scenarios in which catheter replacement may be
warranted. For example, femoral catheters may pose a higher infection risk, particularly in
obese patients or those with elevated BMI, due to anatomical and hygiene-related factors.874,
881 In such cases, early catheter replacement or site change may be appropriate, depending on
duration of catheter use, patient mobility, and findings from infection surveillance.
Ultimately, catheter replacement decisions should be individualized, guided by clinical
assessment of risk factors, catheter site, patient characteristics such as BMI and mobility, and
presence of complications.874, 881, 911 A strategy that prioritizes clinical indications over
routine replacement is aligned with evidence-based practice and promotes patient safety.875
Practice Point 5.4.7: In circumstances where prolonged indications for RRT are
anticipated, a cuffed tunneled catheter can be considered when initiating RRT for AKI,
particularly for children.

277

Non-tunneled, uncuffed catheters are not ideal for long-term use. In clinical situations
where prolonged RRT is anticipated or where preservation of central venous access is
particularly important, the placement of a cuffed tunneled dialysis catheter may be
appropriate, even in the acute setting. Cuffed tunneled catheters offer several advantages
when extended use is expected. They are associated with lower rates of catheter-related
bloodstream infections, owing to the presence of a subcutaneous tunnel and a Dacron cuff
that facilitates tissue ingrowth and serves as a barrier to bacterial migration. 875, 911
Additionally, these catheters provide greater mechanical stability and reduce the risk of
accidental dislodgement, which is especially beneficial in children.912

AF
T

In children, the need to preserve central venous access is essential due to smaller
vessel size and fewer available access sites. Repeated catheter replacements in children
imposes risk and can present technical challenges, including increased likelihood of central
venous stenosis, and cumulative procedural burden.913 Therefore, early placement of a
cuffed, tunneled catheter should be considered when resolution of AKI is uncertain or
prolonged RRT is anticipated. Nonetheless, the decision to insert a tunneled catheter must
consider the patient’s clinical stability, procedural feasibility, and institutional resources,
such as access to interventional radiology or surgical/interventional radiology teams. In
unstable patients or in settings lacking fluoroscopic or surgical support, the use of a
temporary non-tunneled catheter may still be necessary initially, with a plan for conversion
once feasible.

R

Practice Point 5.4.8: For patients who remain dialysis dependent with low probability of
resolution of AKI or patients being prepared for hospital discharge, transition to a
cuffed tunneled catheter should be undertaken.

D

In the context of AKI, a subset of patients will remain RRT dependent and continue
to require RRT at the time of hospital discharge. Prolonged use of a non-tunneled, uncuffed
dialysis catheter has been linked to higher rates of catheter-related bloodstream infections,
greater risk of mechanical complications, and poor long-term catheter function.875, 877
Therefore, once it becomes evident that a patient will remain dialysis-dependent with a low
likelihood of resolution of AKI in the short-term, or when discharge planning begins,
transitioning to a cuffed tunneled catheter should be considered. These catheters offer greater
stability and securement, reducing the risk of accidental dislodgement, and enhanced
durability, making them suitable for outpatient dialysis or as a bridge to permanent access
(i.e., AV fistula/graft). Furthermore, their use preserves central veins and minimizes longterm complications in patients who may progress to long-term dialysis.914
5.5. Anticoagulation for RRT
Recommendation 5.5.1: Where available, we recommend using regional citrate
anticoagulation rather than heparin in children and adults receiving CRRT who do not
have contraindications to citrate (1B).
278

Evidence shows that premature filter clotting can interrupt therapy, reduce efficacy, and
increase bedside workload and costs of CRRT. As such, this recommendation places a high
value on preservation of circuit patency to ensure optimal CRRT delivery, while minimizing
the risk of circuit loss. It also places high value on balancing the benefits of anticoagulation
with the risk of adverse events due to anticoagulation, including bleeding and need for blood
transfusions. Note this recommendation applies to patients who are not receiving systemic
anticoagulation for other indications (e.g., venous thromboembolism, atrial fibrillation).

AF
T

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
The use of anticoagulation during CRRT for patients with AKI who are not already
receiving systemic anticoagulation improves and preserves circuit patency and extends filter
lifespan, which reduces treatment interruptions and associated complications. In patients with
high bleeding risk, anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin may pose a significant
hazard.

R

A systematic review of 6 RCTs comparing regional citrate anticoagulation (RCA)
with unfractionated heparin (UFH) showed that UFH increased the risk of both premature
filter clotting (RR: 1.70; 95% CI: 1.09–2.65) and bleeding events (RR: 3.09; 95% CI: 2.08–
4.60) with no evidence of a difference in discontinuation due to other adverse events
(Supplementary Table S88).915 Another systematic review of 3 RCTs comparing RCA with
regional UFH showed no difference in the risk of filter clotting (RR: 1.01; 95% CI: 0.61–
1.67) with an uncertain effect on bleeding risk (RR: 1.82; 95% CI: 0.23–14.43;
Supplementary Table S89).915

D

RCTs investigating low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) versus RCA showed that
use of RCA greatly decreased the risk of major bleeding and discontinuation due to adverse
events, without evidence of a difference in filter clotting (Supplementary Table S90).915, 916
In a network meta-analysis, RCA in critically ill participants was associated with
significantly longer filter life (weighted mean difference [WMD] +23 hours; p<0.001) and
lower bleeding risk than both UFH and no anticoagulation.915
For circuit anticoagulation in children, systematic review of 6 RCTs comparing RCA
with UFH concluded that use of RCA reduced the risk of systemic bleeding (RR: 0.80; 95%
CI: 0.35–1.85) compared with UFH, with uncertain effects on filter clotting (Supplementary
Table S91). A different systematic review evaluated 1706 pediatric CRRT sessions across 11
studies, of which 38% utilized RCA and 62% used systemic UFH.917 Regional citrate
anticoagulation was consistently associated with significantly longer circuit life and a
reduced risk of clotting, with a pooled risk difference for filter clotting of –20.4% (95% CI: –
14.4% to –26.5%) compared to UFH. Although survival rates did not differ significantly
279

across most studies, RCA demonstrated a more favorable profile in reducing the need for
circuit changes and red blood cell transfusion.918-921
Certainty of evidence
There is moderate certainty of evidence, in adults, that, compared with RCA,
systemic UFH increases the risk of both premature filter clotting and bleeding events, with
no evidence of a difference in discontinuation due to other adverse events. The certainty of
evidence was downgraded due to methodological limitations, but the certainty for the
bleeding outcome was upgraded due to a large effect size.

AF
T

There is low certainty of evidence that regional UFH, in adults, has no difference in
the risk of filter clotting, with an uncertain effect on bleeding, compared with RCA. The
certainty was downgraded for methodological quality and imprecision of estimates of effect.
There is also high certainty of evidence that, compared with LMWH, RCA greatly
decreases the risk of major bleeding and discontinuation due to adverse events, with very low
certainty of evidence regarding a difference in filter clotting. There were methodological
limitations of the studies, but the certainty for harm from bleeding and for discontinuation
due to adverse events were upgraded due to large estimates of effect. Given the high certainty
of evidence for adverse events, but very low certainty of evidence of benefits, overall, it was
determined that there is low certainty of evidence regarding RCA versus LMWH.

R

There is very low certainty of evidence for the comparison of RCA and regional UFH
in children. Certainty of evidence was downgraded for methodological limitations,
sparseness of studies, imprecision, and inconsistencies pertaining to filter clotting.

D

Values and preferences
The Work Group perceived that both patients and healthcare professionals would
prefer anticoagulation strategies that preserve circuit patency to ensure adequate solute
clearance, ultrafiltration, mitigation of interruptions, and minimization of adverse events
(e.g., bleeding events, metabolic complications; need for transfusion). Preservation of circuit
lifespan will also reduce bedside nursing workload, result in fewer dialysis catheter
manipulations, enable delivery of the prescribed RRT dose-intensity, and reduce the amount
of waste. At the same time, there was a strong perception for preferentially using an
anticoagulation regimen that would minimize the risk of bleeding events, particularly among
patients with increased risk (e.g., liver disease; recent surgery; coagulopathy;
thrombocytopenia, etc.). This demands that healthcare professionals balance the relative
benefits of anticoagulation (e.g., longer filter lifespan) with the potential for adverse events.
Among those at high bleeding risk, use of anticoagulant strategies with a lower risk of
bleeding or no anticoagulation may be preferable, despite the expectation of shorter circuit
lifespan. Preferences may also be shaped by institutional expertise, availability of specific
anticoagulants, clinician experience with protocols, and ability to implement appropriate
280

monitoring procedures.922 For example, RCA may be preferred in centers with adequate
training and infrastructure, whereas UFH remains commonly used due to its familiarity and
relative ease of administration.
Among pediatric intensivists and nephrologists, the preference for RCA is
particularly strong due to the frequent use of small circuits and low blood flow rates, which
predispose to clotting when no or suboptimal anticoagulation is used.923-925

AF
T

Resource use and costs
The use of anticoagulants in CRRT has important implications for resource utilization
and healthcare costs, particularly in lower resource settings. Prolonging circuit life through
effective anticoagulation reduces the frequency of circuit changes, which can in turn lower
the consumption of CRRT consumables, reduce nursing workload, and reduce waste. 922 Each
circuit replacement not only incurs material costs but also requires significant clinician time
and interrupts treatment delivery. Regional citrate anticoagulation, while associated with
longer filter lifespan and improved circuit patency, requires additional resources due to more
complex protocols, including clinician education and monitoring of circuit, factors that may
limit its implementation in some institutions.926 Unfractionated heparin remains widely used
due to its familiarity, ease of administration, and relatively low costs, but higher rates of
circuit failure and bleeding-related complications may increase downstream costs, including
transfusions and circuit replacement.916 This is very relevant, in particular in low-resource
settings, where costs associated for CRRT may be limited.

D

R

Regional citrate anticoagulation, though more complex to administer than UFH, may
ultimately offer favorable resource utilization by prolonging filter lifespan, reducing circuit
changes, and minimizing bleeding-related complications. Evidence supports that RCA
increases filter life by 17–23 hours on average compared to UFH, which translates into fewer
interruptions, reduced nursing workload, and less blood loss.915, 924, 927-930 This will reduce
need to replace circuits, for blood transfusions, and emergent catheter manipulations, all
important cost drivers for CRRT.
Considerations for implementation
The successful implementation of anticoagulation protocols in CRRT is influenced by
institutional infrastructure, local expertise, monitoring capabilities, and drug availability. 931
Regional citrate anticoagulation results in superior filter life and bleeding risk reduction, 915,
922 but requires dedicated protocols, calcium and acid-base monitoring, and trained personnel
to manage metabolic complications such as citrate accumulation or dysnatremia. 915 These
requirements may be challenging in low-resource settings, which limits broader adoption
despite its clinical advantages.931 In contrast, UFH is widely available and used due to its
familiarity, ease of use, and relatively low cost,931 though it carries a higher risk of bleeding
and variable circuit lifespan.916, 931 In low-resource settings, some centers continue to operate

281

CRRT without anticoagulation despite shorter circuit life, due to safety concerns and cost
constraints.931

R

AF
T

For successful implementation, institutions should develop standardized protocols,
ensure availability of necessary monitoring tools, and provide regular training for clinical
staff. Tailoring anticoagulation strategy to patient-specific bleeding risk, institutional
capability, and cost-effectiveness is essential to optimize CRRT delivery across diverse care
settings.

D

Figure 17 | Anticoagulation strategy in a patient with AKI requiring RRT
(CRRT/SLED/IHD). AKI, acute kidney injury; CRRT, continuous renal replacement
therapy; HIT, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia; ICU, intensive care unit; IHD, intermittent
hemodialysis; INR, international normalized ratio; LMWH, low-molecular weight heparin;
RCA, regional citrate anticoagulation; RRT, renal replacement therapy; SLED, sustained
low-efficiency dialysis; UFH, unfractionated heparin
Circuit anticoagulation should be applied using institutional protocols and procedures,
considering the individual patient risk of bleeding, coagulation profile, metabolic tolerance,
along with clinician expertise and resource availability (Table 50).

282

D

R

AF
T

Rationale
The rationale for using anticoagulation in CRRT is to prevent premature or unplanned
circuit loss and to optimize filter lifespan and effective treatment time. In patients not
receiving systemic anticoagulation, the addition of anticoagulant prolongs circuit lifespan,
reduces clotting events, and improves the delivery of prescribed RRT therapy. Conversely,
the absence of anticoagulation often leads to circuit clotting, increased blood loss from
discarded circuits, and interruptions in therapy. Based on current data, use of RCA is
recommended over UFH in children and adults who do not have contraindications to citrate.

283

Table 50 | Summary of the pharmacokinetics profiles of anticoagulants used to maintain circuit patency in CRRT
Dose

Citrate 3–4 Prefilter
mmol/l blood citrate
flow; Ca
infusion, Ca
0.25–0.5
infusion
mmol/l
postfilter
postfilter

Unfractionated 3000–
Enhances
heparin
30,000 Da antithrombin
III activity
→ inhibits
thrombin &
factor Xa
Low molecular ~4000–
weight heparin 6000 Da

539 Da

Argatroban

526 Da

Bivalirudin

2180 Da

Onset of
action
Immediate;
half-life 5–
10 min

Clearance

Monitoring

Hepatic
Ionized Ca
metabolism, (pre/post),
muscle
total Ca,
HCO3-, pH,
lactate

Pros

Cons

Prolongs
filter life;
minimal
systemic
bleeding;
safe in highbleed risk

Requires
close
monitoring;
risk of
alkalosis or
citrate
accumulatio
n
Systemic
bleeding
risk; HIT
risk;
variable
effect

Contraindic
ation
Severe liver
failure; shock
with high
vasopressors;
citrate
accumulation

Notes

HIT; high
bleeding risk

Most
common
globally;
variable filter
life

Requires
institutional
infrastructure
and trained
staff

Bolus 500– Systemic or
1000 IU then prefilter
infusion 5– bolus with
10 IU/kg/h infusion,
(adjust aPTT titrate to
or anti-Xa) aPTT or antiXa
Inhibits
40–60 IU/kg SC or bolus
factor Xa
SC or 1
iv, fixed dose
(primarily) mg/kg i.v.
per weight
via
bolus
antithrombin predialysis
Synthetic
0.2–0.5
Continuous
serine
mg/kg/h
infusion in
protease
continuous circuit
inhibitor,
infusion (no
short halfbolus
life
needed)
Direct
Starting 0.5– i.v. infusion,
thrombin
1 µg/kg/min titrate to
inhibitor
iv, titrate to aPTT
aPTT target

Minutes;
Hepatic
aPTT, ACT,
half-life 1–2 metabolism, anti-Xa
h
some kidney

Simple to
use; widely
available;
low-cost

3–5 h (SC); Kidney
half-life 4–7
h

Anti-Xa
(optional)

Predictable
PK; less
HIT risk
than UFH

Kidney
accumulatio
n; less
reversible

HIT, severe
kidney
failure

Less used in
CRRT due to
long half-life

Immediate;
half-life 8
min

Rapid
plasma
hydrolysis

Minimal,
observe for
clotting/
bleeding

Expensive;
limited
availability
outside East
Asia

Hypersensiti
vity;
cost/access
issues

Used widely
in
Japan/South
Korea

Immediate;
half-life 45
min

Hepatic
metabolism

aPTT, liver
function

Costly;
required
careful
titration

Severe liver
dysfunction

Preferred in
HIT with
RRT

Direct
thrombin
inhibitor

Immediate;
half-life 25
min

Kidney and
enzymatic

aPTT,
kidney
function

Low
bleeding
risk; shortacting; ideal
for highbleed risk
Safe in
kidney
failure;
effective in
HIT
Short halflife;
effective in
HIT

Kidney
accumulatio
n; high cost

Severely
abnormal
kidney
function

Fewer data in
CRRT; dosing
may need
adjustment

D
R

Nafamostat
mesylate

Route/dose

AF
T

Anticoagulant Molecular Mechanism
weight
Regional
192 Da
Chelates Ca,
citrate
(trisodium inhibits
citrate;
clotting in
dilute
circuit
citrate;
(regional)
ACD-A)

Starting
0.03–0.1
mg/kg/h,
adjust for
kidney
function

i.v. infusion,
titrate to
aPTT

284

Epoprostenol

360 Da

Inhibits
platelet
aggregation

4–10
i.v. infusion
ng/kg/min
i.v. infusion,
titrate as
tolerated

Immediate; Very short
half-life 3–6 half-life
min
(minutes)

Clinical
Platelet
bleeding,
inhibition
hemodynami without
cs
systemic
effect;
minimal
bleeding

Hypotensio
n,
tachyphylax
is;
vasodilation

Uncontrolled
hypotension

Rarely used;
requires close
BP
monitoring

D
R

AF
T

ACT, activated clotting time; ACDA, acid-citrate-dextrose solution A; aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; BP, blood pressure; Ca, calcium;
CRRT, continuous renal replacement therapy; HCO3-, bicarbonate; HIT, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia; i.v., intravenous; PK, pharmacokinetics;
RRT, renal replacement therapy; SC, subcutaneous; UFH, unfractionated heparin

285

Practice Point 5.5.1: Unfractionated heparin, epoprostenol, or nafamostat mesylate are
acceptable alternatives to regional citrate anticoagulation for children and adults
receiving CRRT if citrate is contraindicated or not available.
In clinical scenarios where RCA cannot be used, due to contraindications (e.g., severe
liver disease, shock states) or logistical barriers, alternative anticoagulation strategies can be
employed to maintain CRRT circuit patency while minimizing the risk of complications
(e.g., bleeding).

AF
T

Unfractionated heparin remains a commonly used alternative. However, in patients at
increased bleeding risk, its use must be weighed carefully due to the well-documented risk of
major hemorrhage with systemic anticoagulation and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
(HIT). For such patients, nafamostat mesilate (a synthetic serine protease inhibitor) and
epoprostenol (a synthetic prostacyclin) have been suggested as safe and effective alternatives.
Two RCTs in adults receiving CRRT support the efficacy and safety of nafamostat mesylate
in high bleeding risk populations.932, 933 Choi et al. performed a RCT of 51 participants
receiving CRRT at a high risk of bleeding, where nafamostat mesilate was found to reduce
clotting events without increasing bleeding complications compared to no anticoagulation. 932
Lee et al. studied 73 adults receiving CRRT and found use of nafamostat mesilate resulted in
fewer clotting events (1.15 vs. 1.74 circuits/24 hours, P<0.05) and required use of fewer
filters (2.7 vs. 4.5 per patient, P=0.01) compared to those receiving no anticoagulation.933
These findings and a recent systematic review support nafamostat mesilate as an alternative
anticoagulant where RCA and UFH are contraindicated or unavailable.934

D

R

In children receiving CRRT, several studies demonstrate feasibility and safety of
alternative anticoagulation.924, 935 Miyaji et al. retrospectively compared RCA and nafamostat
mesilate in critically ill children receiving CRRT.935 Both groups achieved effective
anticoagulation with no significant differences in major bleeding, suggesting comparable
safety profiles.935 The Worldwide Exploration of Renal Replacement Outcomes
Collaborative in Kidney Disease (WE-ROCK) multinational registry included over 800
children and young adults on CRRT.936 Although anticoagulation strategies varied, centers
with experience using nafamostat mesilate or prostacyclin reported comparable survival and
filter longevity across strategies.937 Haga et al. reported that 40% of Japanese pediatric ICUs
surveyed routinely used nafamostat mesilate as the primary anticoagulant for pediatric
CRRT, reflecting national clinical acceptance in high bleeding risk patients. 938
Epoprostenol, a platelet inhibitor with vasodilatory effects, is another alternative used
in both children and adults, especially when systemic anticoagulation is undesirable. While
high-quality RCT data are limited, its use has been supported by clinical experience and
observational data.918, 921, 939

286

Practice Point 5.5.2: The addition of regional citrate anticoagulation to systematic
anticoagulation can be appropriate for children and adults with hypercoagulable states
receiving CRRT.
Patients with systemic hypercoagulable states, such as severe COVID-19, nephrotic
syndrome, or systemic inflammatory conditions can experience recurrent circuit clotting
during CRRT, despite receiving systemic anticoagulation. In such scenarios, the addition of
RCA to ongoing systemic anticoagulation may enhance filter longevity without increasing
bleeding risk and thus be a reasonable strategy in selected children and adults.

AF
T

A prospective multicenter study by Helms et al. involving critically ill patients with
COVID-19 and acute respiratory distress syndrome reported a high incidence of thrombotic
complications (up to 69%), even in patients already receiving systemic prophylactic or
therapeutic anticoagulation.940 This underscores the need to consider augmented
anticoagulation strategies for selected patients expressing hypercoagulable states receiving
extracorporeal therapies.

D

R

A retrospective cohort study by Valle et al. evaluated 238 ICU patients with COVID19-associated AKI undergoing CRRT and compared outcomes between RCA alone and RCA
plus UFH.941 The combined anticoagulation approach resulted in a ~60% reduction in the
hazard of filter clotting, without a significant increase in bleeding events.941 Similar findings
were reported in non-COVID hypercoagulable states. In patients with nephrotic syndrome,
Wang et al. demonstrated that the addition of LMWH to RCA during CRRT was effective in
maintaining circuit patency, with no increase in bleeding complications.942 In critically ill
children, Zhu et al. retrospectively evaluated whether either RCA alone or in combination
with low-dose UFH was effective for preserving and prolonging filter lifespan.943 The study
found that the combined strategy improved circuit survival time without increasing
hemorrhagic risk, reinforcing the potential safety and benefit of dual anticoagulation in
hypercoagulable pediatric patients.943 These results suggest there may be a synergistic effect
between systemic and regional anticoagulation in preventing premature circuit loss in
hypercoagulable patients receiving CRRT.
Practice Point 5.5.3: Unfractionated or low-molecular-weight heparin should be
considered for children and adults receiving intermittent hemodialysis (IHD) or PIRRT
without increased bleeding when not already receiving systematic anticoagulation.
Unfractionated heparin and LMWH are widely used anticoagulants during
conventional IHD or PIRRT to prevent clotting of the extracorporeal circuit. Their use is
particularly relevant in patients who are not receiving systemic anticoagulation and do not
have an elevated bleeding risk.

287

A study by Mareedu et al. in adult patients with COVID-19 associated AKI
undergoing PIRRT found that LMWH was superior to UFH in preventing extracorporeal
circuit clotting, with a lower incidence of filter clotting events and comparable bleeding
risk.944 LMWH may be preferable due to more predictable pharmacokinetics and lower
clotting rates, but both are acceptable and widely available anticoagulation options. While
flush-only (saline) protocols may be used in patients at high bleeding risk, they are generally
associated with a higher risk of circuit clotting and treatment interruption and increase the
workload of the clinical staff.

AF
T

Further supporting evidence comes from a large observational analysis of patients
receiving IHD and concomitant systemic antiplatelet or anticoagulant therapy.945 The
findings suggest that the use of intradialytic UFH did not significantly increase bleeding
events, even in patients on concurrent antiplatelet agents, and remained effective in
preserving circuit patency.945 This highlights the safety of UFH under routine conditions and
provides reassurance for its use in patients without overt bleeding risk. Although pediatricspecific evidence is more limited, clinical practice patterns align with adults, with UFH being
routinely used in IHD and PIRRT for children, particularly those with stable hemodynamics
and low bleeding risk.
Practice Point 5.5.4: Anticoagulation with argatroban, danaparoid, or bivalirudin,
rather than other non-heparin anticoagulants, should be used in adults receiving RRT
with acute heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) who require systemic
anticoagulation.

D

R

HIT is a serious immune-mediated complication of heparin therapy that necessitates
immediate cessation of all heparin products and transition to alternative anticoagulation. For
patients receiving RRT, choosing an effective and safe non-heparin anticoagulant is essential
to minimize thrombotic risk and maintain circuit patency. Argatroban appears to offer the
most favorable balance of efficacy and safety, with danaparoid and bivalirudin also
considered acceptable alternatives.
Argatroban, a direct thrombin inhibitor metabolized by the liver, has been widely
studied in patients with HIT requiring RRT.946 A retrospective cohort study of 74 patients
receiving CRRT with suspected HIT found that argatroban and bivalirudin were both
effective, but argatroban had more activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) levels within
the therapeutic range, indicating better dosing control.946 In a RCT of 66 participants
receiving CRRT with suspected HIT, argatroban was compared with lepirudin.947 Although
both anticoagulants were found to result in similar filter patency, argatroban was associated
with significantly fewer clinically relevant bleeding events (4 vs. 11; OR: 3.9; 95% CI: 1.1–
14.0; P=0.040).947

288

A Bayesian network meta-analysis evaluated various non-heparin anticoagulant
regimens for patients with HIT and suggested that argatroban was associated with the lowest
risk of bleeding and thromboembolism, as well as potentially lower mortality and shorter
hospital stays compared with alternatives, including danaparoid, lepirudin, and bivalirudin. 948

AF
T

Danaparoid, an indirect factor Xa inhibitor with minimal cross-reactivity to heparinantibodies against platelet factor 4 (PF4), also has evidence supporting its use. In a caseseries by Magnani et al. of 122 patients receiving RRT, danaparoid was found effective in
maintaining RRT circuit patency with low rates of bleeding complications.949 Bivalirudin,
another direct thrombin inhibitor, has also been used in RRT, although its renal clearance
necessitates dose adjustments. In comparative studies, bivalirudin has shown similar efficacy
and bleeding risk to argatroban but may be less preferred in patients with severely abnormal
kidney function due to the risk of accumulation.950
Practice Point 5.5.5 Regional citrate anticoagulation rather than heparin or nonheparin anticoagulants is preferable in adults receiving RRT with subacute (HIT-A,
HIT-B) or remote HIT, who are not receiving systemic anticoagulation and require
anticoagulation to prevent clotting of the dialysis circuit.

R

In patients with a history of HIT, particularly those with subacute or remote HIT who
no longer require systemic anticoagulation, the risk of HIT recurrence remains a concern if
heparin is reintroduced. Additionally, non-heparin anticoagulants used systemically may
increase bleeding risk or require complex dosing adjustments. In this context, RCA offers a
safe and effective strategy for maintaining circuit patency during RRT without exposing the
patient to systemic anticoagulation risks.

D

The American Society of Hematology (ASH) 2018 Guidelines explicitly recommend
the use of RCA over heparin or other systemic non-heparin anticoagulants in this scenario.951
For patients with subacute HIT A, subacute HIT B, or remote HIT undergoing RRT and not
requiring systemic anticoagulation, the ASH Guideline panel issued a conditional
recommendation favoring RCA, despite very-low certainty of evidence, due to its favorable
safety profile and lack of systemic anticoagulant effect. The guideline emphasized that RCA
is not appropriate in acute HIT, where systemic anticoagulation is still needed.951
5.6 Hemofilters for RRT
Practice Point 5.6.1: Biocompatible membrane hemofilters and dialyzers should be used
in children and adults with AKI undergoing CRRT or IHD.
All modern hemodialyzers and filters are hollow-fiber devices constructed with
membranes made from cellulose, modified cellulose, or synthetic polymers like polysulfone
and polyethersulfone. Their core function is to clean blood by removing solute and water
through the membrane. While water removal relies on membrane hydraulic permeability, this
289

is no longer a limiting factor clinically due to automated ultrafiltration control systems,
which prevents excessive fluid removal. Consequently, manufacturers have shifted focus
toward optimizing membranes for enhanced solute exchange efficiency by increasing pore
size (e.g., high-flux membranes defined by β₂-microglobulin clearance >20 ml/min) and
engineering membrane surface area, fiber geometry, and material properties to boost
diffusive, convective, adsorptive clearance.952

AF
T

Most modern biocompatible membranes are synthetic and include materials such as
polysulfone, polyethersulfone, polyamide, polycarbonate, polyacrylonitrile (PAN),
polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA), and AN69, a copolymer of sodium methallyl sulfonate
and acrylonitrile (Table 51).953 These membranes are designed to minimize complement
activation and cytokine release, thereby reducing inflammation and improving patient
tolerance during RRT.
Table 51 | Summary of hemofilter membrane materials
Membrane
Composition
Key properties
material

Advantages

Polysulfone (PSU)

- High flux
Aromatic polymer with sulfone
- Good biocompatibility
groups
- Thermostable

- Durable, low protein
binding

Polyethersulfone
(PES)

Similar to PSU, but with ether
linkages

- Supports high-volume
exchange

Polyamide

Aromatic-aliphatic copolyamide
- Hydrophilic
- Good for low-protein
blended with hydrophilic
- Moderately biocompatible binding
polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)

R

Polyacrylonitrile
(PAN)
Acrylonitrile 69
(AN69)

Acrylonitrile polymer

D

Polymethylmetha
Acrylic resin
crylate (PMMA)

- Excellent permeability
- Chemically stable

- High adsorption
- Negative surface charge
(Risk of bradykinin
release)

- Effective for
cytokine/cationic
molecule binding by
adsorptive capacity

- High adsorptive capacity
- Binds middle
- Hydrophobic
molecules & cytokines
-Uniform homogenous pore
by adsorptive capacity
size

The acrylonitrile 69 (AN69) membrane and its surface-treated variants (e.g.,
AN69ST) have demonstrated favorable biocompatibility and cytokine adsorption
properties.953, 954 There remains uncertainty on the efficacy of the AN69 membrane to
prolong circuit/hemofilter lifespan and this may be dependent on patient characteristics,
clinical circumstances, and parameters of RRT (e.g., modality). Surface-modified PAN
membranes, such as polyethyleneimine-treated hemofilters, have been explored for their
potential benefit in the setting of anticoagulation-free PIRRT.955 A randomized crossover
study in 60 acutely ill adults at high risk of bleeding compared heparin-primed
polyethylenimine-treated AN69 membrane (AN69ST) versus AN69 membranes on the
290

success of RRT, filter lifespan, and severity of filter clotting, along with factors associated
with premature filter clotting.955 The success rate, filter lifespans, and severity of filter
clotting were not significantly different. However, in multivariable analysis, higher platelet
count, and higher serum hemoglobin level were associated with increased clotting risk,
whereas a lower aPTT was associated with longer filter lifespan. In patients with aPTT <35.3
seconds, serum hemoglobin >83 g/l, and platelet count <70×10⁹/l, the AN69ST was
associated with longer filter lifespan by 252 minutes, suggesting potential benefit in select
subgroups.955 Comparative studies, such as those evaluating AN69 ST100 versus oXiris®
membranes in non-anticoagulated patients with liver failure receiving CRRT suggest similar
or modest differences in hemofilter longevity in adult patients.953, 954

AF
T

PMMA membrane dialyzers, first introduced in 1977, continue to hold a unique place
in modern dialysis practice due to their distinctive adsorption properties and
biocompatibility. PMMA membranes are characterized by a uniform pore structure and the
ability to adsorb middle- and large-molecular weight proteins, making them particularly
effective for patients with inflammatory or uremic symptoms. Successive generations of
PMMA dialyzers, such as the BG, BK-F, and NF models have been refined to improve pore
size, antithrombogenicity, and overall hemocompatibility.956
Their protein-adsorptive capacity, improved biocompatibility, and potential to
alleviate dialysis-related symptoms and enhance immune response make them a valuable
option for selected patient populations. Overall, the use of biocompatible synthetic
membranes is considered standard of care and contributes to safer, more effective RRT in
acutely ill patients.

D

R

Practice Point 5.6.2: Non-pharmacologic strategies that may be used to maintain and
maximize circuit/hemofilter lifespan include optimizing catheter position in the right
atrium, use of predilution hemofiltration, and continuous venovenous hemodialysis
(CVVHD) or hemodiafiltration (CVVHDF) rather than continuous venovenous
hemofiltration (CVVH).
Maintaining hemofilter and circuit patency is a key goal in CRRT, where
interruptions due to circuit disruption can compromise solute clearance and ultrafiltration. In
addition to pharmacologic anticoagulation, several non-pharmacologic strategies can
optimize circuit lifespan, especially when anticoagulation is contraindicated or must be
minimized.957 Optimizing predilution strategies, catheter positioning, and CRRT modality
are nonpharmacological strategies that may enhance circuit survival (Table 52). These
measures are especially relevant in postoperative or bleeding-prone patients where
anticoagulants may be associated with bleeding risk or are contraindicated.
Tsujimoto et al. evaluated a spectrum of non-pharmacological interventions to
prevent or mitigate premature clotting of extracorporeal circuits during CRRT (Table 52).957
291

This systematic review found that use of CVVHD or CVVHDF rather than CVVH
significantly increased circuit lifespan by an average of 10.15 hours (95% CI: 5.15–15.15).
Similarly, use of predilution hemofiltration rather than post-dilution was associated with a
mean increase in filter lifespan of 9.34 hours (95% CI: -2.60 to 21.29). Catheter-related
factors played a significant role, and surface-modified double-lumen catheters increased
circuit duration by 16.0 hours (95% CI: 13.49–18.51). Notably, hemofilters designed with a
greater number of shorter hollow fibers were associated with a reduced circuit life of 5.87
hours (95% CI: -10.18 to -1.56).957

AF
T

Catheter position is also essential to maintain circuit patency. Studies show that
proper positioning of the catheter tip in the right atrium improves blood flow dynamics and
reduces recirculation, which may prolong filter lifespan and improve dialysis efficiency.958,
959 In an RCT of 100 critically ill adult participants, Morgan et al. compared long (20–24 cm)
versus short (15–20 cm) soft silicone catheters for CRRT targeting tip placement in the right
atrium versus in the superior vena cava.958 Longer catheters placed in the right atrium were
shown to significantly prolong mean circuit lifespan by 6.5 hours (median 24 h; IQR: 11–32
vs. 17.5 h; IQR: 8–23; P=0.001).958 Additionally, these longer catheters improved the
delivered/prescribed daily RRT dose-intensity to a median of 91% (IQR: 85%–100%)
compared to 81% (IQR: 72%–97%) with shorter catheters (P<0.001), reduced the number of
clotting events per patient from 3.6 to 2.3 (P=0.04), and decreased access-related circuit
failures per patient from 0.53 to 0.19 (P=0.04).958 Placement in the right atrium did not
significantly increase complications, with similar rates of atrial arrhythmias between groups
(28% vs. 21%, P=0.6).958

R

The prescribed blood flow rate during CRRT varies globally in adults, ranging from
80 ml/min to over 300 ml/min.959-961 Evidence from 2 RCTs involving a total of 134
participants receiving CRRT found that higher blood flow rates (200–250 ml/min vs. 100–
150 ml/min) had little or no impact on circuit lifespan compared to standard rates.957, 962, 963

D

Various synthetic membranes have been investigated, such as AN69, AN69ST, and
oXiris® (heparin-grafted membrane), for their capacity to preserve circuit patency and
reduce clotting through enhanced biocompatibility or cytokine adsorption. However, current
evidence does not support a clear advantage of any specific membrane type for preserving
and prolonging filter lifespan or improving clinical outcomes in patients receiving CRRT
without anticoagulation.954, 964, 965,966
Table 52 | Nonpharmacological interventions investigated in RCTs to prevent clotting during CRRT
Interventions
Number of
Number of
Comment
trials
participants
Modes
CVVH, CVVHD, or
2
62
The mean circuit lifespan with
CVVHDF967, 968
CVVHDF was 10.2 hours longer (95%
CI: 5.2–15.2) than CVVH.
292

Predilution or postdilution969, 970

2

47

Increase in filter lifespan of 9.34 hours
(95% CI: -2.60 to 21.29) with
predilution.

2

134

No significant difference of filter
lifespan.

1

100

Surface-modified double- 1
lumen catheter971

262

The mean circuit lifespan with longer
catheters was 6.5 hours longer (95%
CI: 1.5–11.5) than short catheters
The mean circuit lifespan with surfacemodified double-lumen catheters was
16 hours longer (95% CI: 13.5–18.5)
than standard double-lumen catheters.

Blood flow
Higher or standard blood
flow rate962, 963
Catheter types
Catheter length (long or
short)958

2

40

No significant difference of filter
lifespan.
The mean circuit lifespan with longer
fiber filters had longer running times
(1276 vs. 851 min, P=0.04) than
standard hollow fiber filters
No significant difference of filter
lifespan.
No significant difference of filter
lifespan.

AF
T

Filter types
AN69ST with heparingrafted membrane954, 965
Longer or shorter hollow
fiber972

1

6

R

Flat plate fiber or hollow 1
38
fibera
Filter with a larger
1
38
membrane surface areaa
Other
Single- or double-site
1
38
No significant difference of filter
infusion anticoagulationa
lifespan.
a
966
From one study embedding 3 comparisons. AN69ST, polyethylenimine-treated AN69 membrane;
CVVH, continuous venovenous hemofiltration; CVVHD, continuous venovenous hemodialysis;
CVVHDF, continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration; RCT, randomized controlled trial. Adapted from a
Cochrane systematic review.957

D

Practice Point 5.6.3: Where regional citrate or systemic heparin anticoagulation are
contraindicated or not available, priming of the CRRT circuit/filter with a solution
containing unfractionated heparin (UFH) may be used to increase circuit/hemofilter
lifespan.
Priming the circuit with UFH can theoretically precoat the hemofilter surfaces and
tubing and mitigate early thrombus formation by inhibiting platelet and fibrin adhesion.
While the use of regional or systemic anticoagulation (e.g., RCA) often yields longer filter
survival, the use of heparin priming can provide a pragmatic and low-risk alternative,
especially for patients with contraindications to RCA or where bleeding risk limits the use of
systemic heparin.973
Several studies have evaluated the efficacy of heparin-albumin priming to reduce
extracorporeal circuit clotting during RRT, suggesting this strategy may have a potential role
in prolonging circuit lifespan and reducing exposure to systemic anticoagulation. In an in
293

vitro study by Kyrk et al., circuits primed with a combination of 5,000 IU of unfractionated
heparin and albumin (5 ml of 20% solution in 1l saline) were able to complete the full 192minute simulated hemodialysis sessions with only minimal clotting.974 In contrast, circuits
primed with 0.9% saline alone clotted within a median of 21 minutes (IQR: 18–27 minutes),
and those with albumin alone lasted a median of 26 minutes (IQR: 19–35 minutes), implying
the potential superior thrombo-prophylactic effect of the heparin-albumin combination.974

AF
T

Limited clinical evidence from retrospective analyses supports these findings. In a
retrospective cohort study of 321 patients with high bleeding risk receiving 1408 IHD
sessions, use of heparin-albumin priming was associated with a clotting-related session
interruption rate of 1.0% compared to 0.8% in those receiving standard heparin.975
Importantly, patients in the heparin-albumin group required significantly lower systemic
heparin doses, median 1200 IU compared to 5000 IU (P<0.001), with no increase in bleeding
complications.975 In a similar retrospective cohort study of 68 patients receiving IHD (248
sessions), use of a priming solution with heparin-albumin was associated with lower
utilization of heparin during IHD, with no increase in clotting or bleeding complications
when compared with use of systemic anticoagulation.976
5.7. Replacement and dialysate solutions for RRT
Practice Point 5.7.1: Use bicarbonate, rather than lactate, as a buffer in dialysate and
replacement fluid for CRRT in adults with AKI in the following scenarios: circulatory
shock, liver failure or lactic acidemia.

D

R

This practice point is reformatted from Recommendation 5.7.1 from the KDIGO 2012
Guideline.12 The guidance is based on avoiding metabolic acidosis and improving
hemodynamic stability of patients with conditions that may impair lactate metabolism.
Evidence from RCTs consistently shows superior metabolic and hemodynamic effects with
the use of bicarbonate-buffered compared with lactate-buffered solutions for patients
receiving CRRT.
Bicarbonate-buffered solutions are preferred due to their superior metabolic
compatibility in critically ill patients with impaired lactate metabolism. In circulatory shock,
hepatic perfusion is often reduced, impairing the capacity of the liver to convert lactate into
bicarbonate. Consequently, the use of lactate-buffered solutions may result in iatrogenic
lactate accumulation and worsen metabolic acidosis. In contrast, bicarbonate-buffered fluids
provide more predictable acid-base correction and avoid iatrogenic lactic acidosis, leading to
improved hemodynamic tolerance and more accurate interpretation of serum lactate
concentrations as a measure of end-organ perfusion.977
Four notable RCTs support the use of bicarbonate over lactate as a buffer in CRRT.
In a single center RCT by Barenbrock et al., the use of bicarbonate-buffered replacement
fluids in participants undergoing CVVH significantly improved cardiovascular stability
294

compared to lactate-buffered replacement fluids.978 Among the 117 critically ill adults
enrolled, those receiving bicarbonate-buffered solutions had lower mean blood lactate levels
(17.4 ± 8.5 mg/dl) compared to the lactate-buffered group (28.7 ± 10.4 mg/dl; P<0.05), and
higher serum bicarbonate concentrations (23.7 ± 0.4 mmol/l vs. 21.8 ± 0.5 mmol/l; P<0.01).
Importantly, the incidence of hypotensive episodes was significantly lower in the
bicarbonate-buffered group (0.26 ± 0.09 episodes per 24 h) compared to the lactate-buffered
group (0.60 ± 0.31; P<0.05). Furthermore, cardiovascular events occurred less frequently in
participants treated with bicarbonate-buffered fluids (15% vs. 38%; P<0.01).978

AF
T

Similarly, in the study by Kierdorf et al., 12 adults with AKI receiving CVVH were
enrolled in a randomized crossover trial comparing bicarbonate- versus lactate-buffered
replacement fluids.979 The findings suggested that bicarbonate-buffered solutions provided
superior acid-base balance and hemodynamic stability. Specifically, participants receiving
bicarbonate-buffered solutions had significantly higher arterial pH values (mean 7.38 ± 0.04)
compared to those receiving lactate buffers (7.32 ± 0.06; P<0.05), and serum bicarbonate
levels were also higher (22 ± 3 mmol/l vs. 18 ± 4 mmol/l; P<0.05). Importantly, the
bicarbonate-buffered group experienced fewer hypotensive episodes (0.8 ± 0.7 vs. 2.3 ± 1.1
episodes/day; P<0.05) and lower systemic lactate levels, particularly in the context of
impaired tissue perfusion.979

D

R

In a prospective, randomized crossover trial involving 26 critically ill adults
undergoing CVVHD, Zimmerman et al. directly compared a bicarbonate-buffered dialysate
with a lactate-buffered dialysate over 2 48-hour treatment periods in a crossover design.980
Both solutions effectively raised serum bicarbonate from baseline (bicarbonate group:
18.9 ± 2.0 mmol/l to 22.2 ± 1.2 mmol/l; lactate group: 16.3 ± 1.5 mmol/l to 22.2 ± 1.4
mmol/l). Importantly, serum lactate levels differed significantly; patients dialyzed with
lactate-buffered dialysate were found to have higher serum lactate concentrations (mean
2.92 ± 0.45 mmol/l) than those treated with bicarbonate-buffered dialysate
(1.61 ± 0.25 mmol/l; P=0.01). In participants with hepatic dysfunction, lactate increased to
3.39 ± 0.68 mmol/l in participants randomized to lactate-buffered fluids compared to
1.78 ± 0.42 mmol/l in participants treated with bicarbonate-buffered fluids (P=0.036).
The risks associated with bicarbonate-buffered CRRT solutions are minimal when
used appropriately and with adequate monitoring. While lactate-based solutions may be more
readily available or less expensive in some settings, their use in high-risk populations (e.g.,
those with shock) may lead to clinically significant metabolic disturbances. Therefore, the
balance of evidence and physiological rationale favors bicarbonate-buffered solutions in
patients with circulatory shock or liver failure.608 Implementing bicarbonate-buffered
solutions in CRRT requires careful attention to infrastructure, training, and supply chain
logistics. These solutions are typically delivered in two-chamber bag systems to prevent
calcium-bicarbonate precipitation, necessitating compatible CRRT machines with
appropriate software and fluid handling capabilities.
295

In low-resource settings, where commercial CRRT solutions may not be readily
available, the implementation of bicarbonate-buffered solutions can present additional
challenges. Staff must be trained to manage the mixing process and understand the potential
implications of incorrect handling. The requirement for two-chamber bag systems or inhouse preparation to prevent calcium-bicarbonate precipitation demands appropriate
infrastructure, training, and resources that may be limited or competing with other priorities
in such environments.981 Storage requirements are more stringent than for lactate-buffered
solutions due to a typically shorter shelf life and temperature sensitivity. Despite these
considerations, the widespread adoption of bicarbonate-buffered solutions in commercially
available CRRT fluids has facilitated their integration into routine practice.

AF
T

Bicarbonate-buffered solutions are preferred over lactate-buffered solutions for
CRRT in critically ill children and adults with AKI, particularly those with circulatory shock
and/or liver failure. This preference is grounded in their superior physiological compatibility
and improved safety profile in populations where lactate metabolism is impaired.
Practice Point 5.7.2: CRRT dialysate and replacement solutions should be sterile.
Dialysate and replacement solutions for IRRT should comply with American
Association of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI) standards regarding contamination
with bacteria and endotoxins.

D

R

The safety and effectiveness of CRRT are dependent on the composition and quality
of dialysate and replacement solutions. In particular, the use of sterile solutions is imperative
for CRRT, as these fluids are administered directly into the extracorporeal circuit and may
enter the patient’s circulation either through convection or diffusion. Contaminated solutions
pose a significant risk for bloodstream infections, pyrogenic reactions, and systemic
inflammatory responses, which can adversely affect patient outcomes, especially in critically
ill populations.
IRRT should at a minimum conform to the AAMI standards for microbial
contamination and endotoxin levels. The AAMI standards recommend that dialysate used in
hemodialysis contains <200 colony-forming units (CFU)/ml of bacteria and <2 endotoxin
units (EU)/ml, with target values of <100 CFU/ml and <0.25 EU/ml for ultrapure
dialysate.982, 983 These thresholds are designed to minimize the risk of chronic inflammation
and endotoxin-related complications in patients undergoing dialysis.982, 983
In line with the ADQI consensus on precision fluid management in CRRT, the use of
biocompatible, sterile, and metabolically favorable fluids is recommended to reduce
treatment-related complications and optimize patient outcomes.984 The combination of sterile
delivery and bicarbonate buffering aligns with international best practices and enhances both
safety and efficacy in the management of AKI in critically ill populations.
296

Practice Point 5.7.3: Locally compounded dialysate and replacement CRRT solutions
should be prepared using standard quality control processes or commercially available
dialysate and replacement CRRT solutions should be used to allow flexibility in
achieving various goals of plasma electrolyte compositions to address most clinical
circumstances.

983

AF
T

Commercially manufactured CRRT solutions are a preferred option when available,
due to their reliable composition, sterility, and regulatory oversight. In clinical settings where
commercial CRRT solutions may not be readily available or feasible, locally compounded
dialysate and replacement fluids offer a practical and flexible alternative.981, 985 However, to
ensure safety and efficacy, it is essential that such in-house solutions are prepared using
standardized protocols, stringent quality control processes, and appropriate staff training. 982,

D

R

Several studies support the feasibility and safety of this approach. Yimsangyad et al.
evaluated the implementation of an in-house, quality-controlled, dialysis solution preparation
system for CRRT in a low-resource setting.985 Over a 12-month period, 48 critically ill
patients received a total of 352 CRRT treatments using locally compounded dialysate and
replacement fluids.985 The study found that all prepared solutions met microbial safety
standards, with no detectable bacterial contamination or endotoxin levels above acceptable
thresholds. Electrolyte concentrations in the in-house solutions remained within ±10% of
target values, indicating consistency and reliability in preparation. Importantly, there were no
adverse clinical events attributable to the use of these solutions, including catheter-related
infections, metabolic disturbances, or hemodynamic instability. From an economic
perspective, the in-house production reduced the cost per liter of CRRT solution by
approximately 30% compared to commercial alternatives. These findings demonstrate that,
when appropriate quality control measures are applied, locally compounded CRRT solutions
can be a safe, effective, and cost-efficient option in low-resource healthcare settings.985
Similarly, Lumlertgul et al. described the successful deployment of in-house CRRT solutions
during the COVID-19 pandemic, showing that this method could be rapidly scaled in
response to supply shortages without compromising patient safety or treatment efficacy. 981
Practice Point 5.7.4: Base the choice of dialysate and replacement CRRT solutions with
specific compositions upon the goals for serum electrolyte and acid–base parameters.
The use of dialysate and replacement solutions should be individualized and reassessed
at frequent intervals depending upon the clinical condition of the patient to ensure that
they are appropriate.
The composition of dialysate and replacement solutions in CRRT should be
individualized and routinely reassessed to align with the evolving clinical needs of critically
ill children and adults with AKI. Selecting or adapting CRRT solutions with specific
297

electrolyte concentrations, such as phosphate-containing, high- or low-sodium, high- or lowpotassium, or high-bicarbonate fluids, can support targeted correction of metabolic,
electrolyte and acid-base abnormalities.
Phosphate-containing CRRT solutions are increasingly used. Thompson Bastin et al.
reported that the use of phosphate-containing CRRT solutions was associated with shorter
duration of mechanical ventilation and improved phosphate control in adults,986 while Kim et
al. showed more stable serum phosphate levels with the use of phosphate-containing
dialysate compared with standard solutions.987

AF
T

For patients with disturbances in acid-base balance, especially those receiving RCA,
the use of a high bicarbonate-containing CRRT solution may accelerate pH normalization
without compromising safety.988 Additionally, in cases of dysnatremias, adjustments in
sodium concentration through customized CRRT solutions may be necessary to achieve
gradual and safe correction.989 Protocols for sodium-based osmotherapy have been developed
to guide such individualized management.990-993 Frequent reassessment, ideally every 6 to 12
hours, is essential given the dynamic clinical course of critical illness and patient
susceptibility to rapid shifts in fluid, electrolytes, and acid-base balance.

R

For patients receiving glucose-free CRRT solutions, vigilance is also required to
prevent complications like euglycemic ketoacidosis. In a case series of 8 adults with
preexisting diabetes mellitus receiving CRRT with a glucose-free solution, all patients
exhibited worsening high-anion-gap ketoacidosis and elevated serum β-hydroxybutyrate
levels despite stable or improved lactate levels.994 The study underscores the importance of
monitoring patients for the development of euglycemic ketoacidosis when receiving glucosefree CRRT and highlights the need for proactive nutritional support and glucose
supplementation as preventive measures.994

D

Table 53 summarizes the currently available dialysate and replacement CRRT
solutions that are available.

Table 53 | Summary of a representative sample of current commercially available dialysate and
replacement CRRT solutions
Composition
BICSOL
Prismasol MultiPlus PrismOcal
Ci-Ca
Phoxilium
Accusol 35
(mmol/l)
35-108 K0
BO
K2
B22
dialysate
Na+

140

138

140

140

140

133

140

K+

–

–

–

2

4

2,4

4

CI

109.5

108

109.5

110.5

120.5

116.5

115.9

HCO3

35

35

32

35

22

20

30

Ca2+

1.75

1.5

1.75

1.5

–

–

1.25

Mg2+

0.5

0.75

0.5

0.75

0.75

0.75

0.6

298

H2PO4

–

–

–

1.0

1.2

Lactate

–

–

3

-

3

–

–

Glucose

–

5.55

–

5.55

6.1

5.55

–

Citrate

–

–

–

–

–

–

–

Osmolarity

287

289

287

296

296.4

278

293

pH

7.4

7.5

7.0–8.5

7.4

7.0–8.0

7.4

7.0–8.5

Preparation

2-chamber

2-chamber

2-chamber

2-chamber

2-chamber

2-chamber

2-chamber

Ca, calcium; Cl, chlorine; CRRT, continuous renal replacement therapy; H2PO4, dihydrogen phosphate; HCO3,
bicarbonate; K, potassium; Mg, magnesium; Na, sodium

AF
T

5.8. Ultrafiltration in RRT
Practice Point 5.8.1: The target ultrafiltration should be prescribed daily for CRRT and
prior to each IRRT session and be frequently monitored.

R

Fluid accumulation and overload is a common indication for RRT initiation in
children and adults.995, 996 Ultrafiltration, defined as the extracorporeal removal of fluid
during RRT, supports fluid management, facilitating resolution of organ edema and weaning
from organ support. However, evidence extrapolated from patients with kidney failure
receiving maintenance dialysis has shown that rapid ultrafiltration during IHD sessions can
induce systemic stress and can precipitate ischemic organ injury (i.e., heart, gut, kidney, and
brain).997-999 Evidence in children and adults implies there is a U-shaped association between
the rate of ultrafiltration and mortality.1000-1003 While an important observation, there are
notable limitations to these data, which were derived from retrospective, observational
studies or secondary analyses of large RCTs, with inherent challenges to inferences from
such data for clinical practice. The primary exposure, rate of ultrafiltration, was generally
time-averaged, of variable duration, often dichotomized across these studies.1000-1005 In
addition, the relationship with outcomes is vulnerable to confounding by disease severity. 1006

D

The prescription for ultrafiltration should target fluid removal, facilitate weaning
from organ support, and not incite harm by worsening or inciting new organ injury.1000, 1004,
1007 Among critically ill children receiving CRRT, ultrafiltration targeting a negative net fluid
balance while also preserving urine output was associated with fewer CRRT-days and lower
rates of MAKE30.1008
This necessitates regular review of the ultrafiltration prescription every 12–24 hours
(or more frequently), the net ultrafiltration (UFNET), and patient fluid balance goals.1009 There
is rationale for prescriptions to be weight-based, similar to CRRT dose-intensity (e.g.,
ml/kg/h) and evidence for UFNET limits in patients receiving IRRT, rather than use of hourly
or daily absolute volumes, which may inadvertently expose patients to low or high timeaverage ultrafiltration and complications from hemodynamic instability or fluid overload.1010
299

For patients receiving CRRT, healthcare professionals must understand the hourly
CRRT device and patient fluid balances.1011 The CRRT device fluid balance is calculated as
the difference in the volume of fluids infused hourly through the CRRT device (e.g.,
replacement fluids, dialysate solutions, anticoagulant) and the total hourly effluent volume.
The patient fluid balance is calculated as the hourly difference in patient inputs (e.g.,
medications, blood products, nutrition) and outputs (e.g., urine, drains, gastrointestinal),
including ultrafiltration. The integration of CRRT device and patient fluid balances are then
used to determine the net device-patient fluid balance, which is calculated based on the
preceding hour.984, 1012, 1013 This permits the UFNET rate to be determined hourly and to be
aligned with the desired device fluid removal to achieve total fluid balance goals over time
(6–24 hours).

AF
T

Practice Point 5.8.2: The prescribed intensity of ultrafiltration (e.g., timing and rate of
removal) should be individualized and consider patient characteristics, clinical context,
and phase of illness.

R

Heterogeneity in patient characteristics, acuity, and evolving phases of acute illness
demands that prescribed ultrafiltration be patient- and context-specific and regularly
adjusted.984, 1003, 1014 In children and adults, the optimal prescribed ultrafiltration intensity is
uncertain. Existing evidence indicates that the delivery of both low and high ultrafiltration in
children and adults may be associated with harm.1000-1003 As such, the intensity of UFNET
should be tailored to patient-specific fluid balance targets while minimizing the risk of
adverse events (Table 54). The intensity of UFNET may modify patient outcomes (e.g.,
mortality; AKI resolution) and should be prescribed to support organ dysfunction resolution
while also minimizing harm.1000, 1001, 1004, 1008, 1015

D

Table 54 | Strategies to mitigate adverse events associated with ultrafiltration
Strategy
• Reduce unnecessary fluid administration in critically ill patients to avoid excess
accumulation.
• Cool dialysate to ≤36oC.
• Prescribe net ultrafiltration (UFNET) by body weight rather than target total volume.
• Prescribe a slower UFNET and continuous gradual fluid removal.
• Avoid high UFNET while patients are receiving hemodynamic support (i.e., vasopressors).
• Review routinely and regularly the UFNET targets and response to fluid removal.
• Avoid or minimize prolonged exposure to high UFNET (short-term high UFNET may be
indicated and necessary to address life-threatening complications of fluid overload).
Adapted from Murugan et al.1016

5.9 Discontinuation of RRT
Practice Point 5.9.1: Discontinue RRT when it is no longer needed either because of
evidence of resolution of AKI to the point that kidney function is adequate to meet the
patient’s metabolic and fluid balance demands or because RRT is no longer consistent
with the patient’s preferences for care.
300

Most survivors of acute and critical illness complicated by AKI recover sufficient
function to become RRT independent.713, 815, 1017 Healthcare professionals should aim to
frequently and regularly evaluate for indications of AKI resolution, recovery of intrinsic
kidney function, and for the potential to feasibly discontinue RRT. This may minimize the
duration of risk associated with extracorporeal device/circuit exposure.

AF
T

The decision on whether to discontinue RRT integrates several considerations,
including whether there has been sufficient resolution of AKI and recovery in intrinsic
kidney function to meet current demands (e.g., acid-base, electrolyte, azotemic, fluid),
whether there has been improvement in the acute illness that precipitated AKI and start of
RRT, and whether there is a commitment to ongoing RRT support if a trial of RRT
discontinuation is unsuccessful (i.e., change to goals-of-care designation).

R

Clinical trials have used clinical indications, various metabolic parameters, urine
output, and timed creatinine clearance to inform the timing of RRT discontinuation.820 The
Liberation of Acute Dialysis Trial (LIBERATE-D) focused on hospitalized adult patients
with AKI who were hemodynamically stable and not requiring vasopressor support. 1018 The
trial compared a strategy of continuing IHD for AKI only when specific metabolic or clinical
indications were met (e.g., azotemia, hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, pulmonary edema,
clinical judgement) versus continuing scheduled IHD session 3 times per week until specific
urine output (>1 l/d in the absence of diuretics or >2 l/d with diuretics) or creatinine
clearance (>20 ml/min) criteria were met.1018 Among the 221 participants enrolled in the
trial, the former strategy resulted in fewer dialysis sessions per week, earlier recovery to IHD
independence, and more participants achieving kidney function recovery by the time of
hospital discharge.

D

The strategy to assess for recovery of intrinsic kidney function during RRT depends
on the modality being used. For patients receiving IRRT, kidney recovery can be assessed
over interdialytic periods, whereas for patients receiving CRRT, relatively steady state can be
achieved after 24–48 hour that may enable clearer assessment (e.g., urine volume; urinary
excretion of creatinine; timed creatinine clearance, etc.).1019-1026 However, the current
literature is challenging to draw strong inferences from because “successful” RRT
discontinuation has been inconsistently defined, ranging from RRT-free between 3–90
days.1024, 1027 As such, decision-making on RRT discontinuation remains subject to wide
practice variation.1020
Practice Point 5.9.2: Clinical and metabolic parameters, interdialytic SCr changes,
urine output, fluid balance, other parameters of resolution of AKI, and residual kidney
function can be used to guide decision-making for RRT discontinuation.

301

Interdialytic periods, whether during an interruption in CRRT or between scheduled
IRRT sessions, provide an opportunity to evaluate for persistence of clinical and metabolic
indications for RRT, as well as signs of AKI resolution and kidney function recovery. In a
single center retrospective study, 448 CRRT-free intervals in 222 critically ill adult patients
receiving CRRT were evaluated to predict the suitability for a trial of CRRT
discontinuation.1025 Three parameters best predicted successful CRRT liberation: shorter total
duration of CRRT, lower Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score, and urine
output. Specifically, a higher urine output in the CRRT-free period predicted successful
liberation (66 ml/h vs. 10 ml/h).1025 Similarly, interdialytic periods between IRRT sessions
can be used to observe urine output and additional parameters (e.g., timed creatinine
clearance).

R

AF
T

There have been few clinical risk prediction scores developed to guide decisions for
RRT discontinuation.1025, 1028-1030 In a single center in Korea, 1158 critically ill adult patients
receiving CRRT were evaluated for factors associated with successful CRRT
discontinuation, defined as being RRT-free ≥7 days after initial discontinuation.1028 Factors
associated with successful CRRT discontinuation were greater urine output (≥300 ml/24h),
MAP (50–78 mm Hg), serum potassium <4.1 mmol/l, and BUN <35 mg/dl (serum urea
<12.5 mmol/l). A clinical prediction score, comprised of only these 4 variables, had an
AUROC 0.73. Another retrospective cohort study in adult patients described the clinical
factors predictive of successful CRRT discontinuation, defined as RRT-free survival ≥72
hours after CRRT discontinuation in 1135 critically ill patients with AKI.1029 Successful
discontinuation was observed in 20%. Factors predictive of successful discontinuation
included urine output, SCr, cumulative fluid balance, CRRT duration, and receipt of
vasoactive therapy. Internal validation showed good discrimination (AUROC: 0.78).

D

In the LIBERATE-D trial, participants received IHD only when one of the following
indications were met: BUN ≥112 mg/dl (serum urea ≥40 mmol/l); hyperkalemia ≥6 mmol/l
(>5.5 mmol/l if despite medical treatment); arterial pH <7.15 from metabolic acidosis (or
bicarbonate level <12 mEq/l); acute pulmonary edema due to fluid overload responsible for
hypoxemia despite diuretic therapy; or clinician judgment.1018 This strategy increased the
likelihood of achieving recovery of kidney function (alive and not receiving dialysis at
hospital discharge) compared with continuing treatment 3 times per week until urine output
or creatinine clearance criteria were met (64% vs. 50%).
Practice Point 5.9.3: Urine output >450 ml/24 hours without exposure to diuretics or
>2300 ml/24 hours with exposure to diuretics and 2-hour timed creatinine clearance
≥23 ml/min can be used to predict successful RRT discontinuation in adults.
While clinical studies have identified various factors associated with successful
discontinuation from RRT, most studies have been small and retrospective.1019-1021, 1023, 1024,
1031, 1032 Urine output has consistently been shown to be an important predictor of successful
302

RRT discontinuation.1023, 1024, 1026, 1028, 1031, 1033-1035 All clinical prediction tools developed
have integrated urine output as a predictor of successful RRT discontinuation.1025, 1028-1030 In
general, a urine output exceeding >450 ml/24 hours without exposure to diuretics or >2300
ml/24 hours with exposure to diuretics predicts a high probability of a successful trial of RRT
discontinuation and serves to guide clinical decision-making.1020, 1024

AF
T

Numerous studies have explored varying urine output thresholds for RRT
discontinuation.1024 In a single center retrospective study of 86 critically ill adults receiving
RRT, urine output <0.5 ml/kg/h over 6 hours after CRRT was stopped was associated with
lower likelihood of successful liberation (AUROC: 0.91), whereas an urine output of 178
ml/6 hours appears to be the minimum threshold to predict success.1022 In a retrospective,
multicenter study of 213 adults receiving CRRT, greater urine output (>30 ml/h) at the time
of discontinuation was the best predictor of success (AUROC: 0.814), defined as CRRT
cessation for ≥7 days.1023
In adults, the use of a timed creatinine clearance (e.g., 2-hour; 6-hour; 24-hour) can
also be used to predict successful RRT discontinuation.820, 1019 In a small retrospective study,
a 2-hour timed creatinine clearance measurement was a reasonable predictor of successful
discontinuation, defined as RRT-free at 7-days, when performed in the 12-hours prior to
CRRT discontinuation.1019 A threshold 2-hour creatinine clearance of 23 ml/min was
associated with a sensitivity, specificity and positive predictive value for successful
discontinuation of 75.5%, 84.4%, and 88.8%, respectively.

R

Practice Point 5.9.4: Use of diuretic therapy prior to and following RRT discontinuation
can be used to augment urine output and manage fluid balance but has not been proven
to facilitate resolution of AKI.
The use of diuretics, predominantly furosemide, is common among patients with

AKI.1036 Large cohort studies have shown up to two-thirds of critically ill adults with AKI

D

are exposed to diuretic therapy.1037 In the Standard versus Accelerated Initiation of Renal
Replacement Therapy in Acute Kidney Injury (STARRT-AKI) trial, diuretic exposure prior
to randomization occurred in 35% of participants.713 In the Initiation of Dialysis Early Versus
Delayed in the Intensive Care Unit (IDEAL-ICU) study, diuretic exposure exceeded 50% in
the 7 days following enrollment124, whereas in the AKIKI trial, 18.7% were exposed to
diuretic therapy prior to starting RRT, predominantly in the delayed RRT strategy compared
with the early strategy (36.5% vs. 1.3%, p<0.001).712
The use of diuretics is also common among critically ill children prior to and after
CRRT initiation.1038 In a large European survey of pediatric ICU practice, 39% reported
using diuretic therapy during CRRT and up to one-third reported using a diuretic challenge,
either as a bolus alone or followed by a diuretic infusion during CRRT discontinuation.891

303

Diuretic therapy in patients with AKI is most often used to facilitate urine output and
prevent or treat complications of fluid accumulation. 433, 1037 Evidence indicates that exposure
to diuretics alters the urine output threshold for predicting successful RRT liberation.1020, 1022
A robust urine output response to a diuretic challenge may provide added information on the
likelihood of successful RRT discontinuation.1022, 1031, 1033 Importantly, there is no compelling
evidence to suggest that the pre-emptive use of diuretics can facilitate more rapid resolution
of AKI;1039, 1040 however, diuretics have an adjuvant role in augmenting urine output and for
managing fluid balance upon RRT discontinuation. In a small single center RCT, a
continuous infusion of furosemide after RRT discontinuation was associated with
augmentation of urine output and natriuresis but there was no difference in rate of AKI
resolution or RRT independence.1041

R

AF
T

5.10 Quality assurance for RRT
Practice Point 5.10.1: RRT programs should include the following quality standards to
reduce unnecessary variation, facilitate adoption of evidence-based practices, and
support opportunities for continuous quality improvement:
• Dedicated leadership, ideally with a medical (physician) and nursing dyad
partnership.
• Certified training and continuous education of all healthcare professionals
prescribing and delivering acute RRT.
• Standardized order sets for the acute prescription of RRT, including decisionsupport for dose-intensity of solute clearance, ultrafiltration for fluid removal,
and anticoagulation strategy.
• Standardized charting for RRT for both conventional and electronic health
records, inclusive of parameters of patient and machine solute clearance and
fluid balance.
• Monitoring and reporting of quality and key performance measures of RRT

D

Variations in standards of practice for how RRT is prescribed, monitored, and
delivered829 can stem from differences in operational organization (e.g., nephrology,
intensive care, or both), knowledge gaps, and suboptimal implementation of evidence-based
practices.1012, 1013, 1042 The integration of quality standards and routine indicators of
performance specific to acute RRT can reduce unnecessary variation and harmonize practice,
improve adoption of evidence-based practices, and identify opportunities for iterative
continuous quality improvement.791, 1012, 1043
Acute RRT programs can more effectively drive quality and innovation with
dedicated leadership.831-833, 1044 This construct is supported by numerous organizations and
societies.708, 788, 790, 791, 1045 Local leadership and championing of quality initiatives in acute
RRT is foundational to building a team and creating a culture of continuous quality
improvement and innovation.790, 1046
304

RRT programs are highly specialized and depend on a multidisciplinary team (e.g.,
physician, nurse, dietician, pharmacist, biomedical engineer, medical informatics) that is
specifically trained to prescribe, deliver, and monitor acute RRT.1042 Education is
fundamental to enable practice standardization and delivery of high quality RRT. A modified
Delphi process identified education and training as a high priority for acute RRT programs;
however, it was recognized that the specialized training for RRT, particularly CRRT, was
poorly described and characterized.1042 This is likely to contribute to disparities in practice
across institutions. The Saving Young Lives program identified the importance of “hands-on”
training and successfully empowered clinical teams to deliver standardized acute PD for AKI
in low-resource settings.790

AF
T

The use of standardized order sets with integrated decision-support, including
integration of current literature and guideline recommendations, can facilitate greater practice
harmonization and alignment with delivery of evidence-based RRT standards.791, 834 The
growing utilization of EHR can be leveraged to provide a platform for consistent charting
and sharing of performance indicators, including the development of local benchmarks and
detection of avoidable deviations in practice.743, 1043 The EHR can be an important tool for
identifying evidence-to-care gaps and for the implementation of continuous quality
improvement.1047
Practice Point 5.10.2: Key quality performance measures of RRT include measures of
effective treatment time (i.e., downtime), filter lifespan, prescribed-to-delivered doseintensity, and ultrafiltration.

R

There has been limited development and validation of key quality and performance
indicators for RRT for AKI despite its resource implications.1013, 1043 A modified Delphi
study developed a prioritized list of CRRT quality indicators from an international
interdisciplinary panel of experts (Table 55).1042

D

Several studies have described specific indicators of acute RRT performance, mostly
among patients receiving CRRT which focused on filter lifespan, effective treatment time,
and delivered dose-intensity.829, 831-833, 1013, 1044 Effective treatment time, defined as the
measured time receiving treatment minus any interruptions, either planned or unplanned, has
been proposed as a quality indicator of CRRT performance.834 This quality indictor is
focused on describing total CRRT treatment downtime in a 24-hour period. While
interruptions may be unavoidable, it is important to recognize that downtime can
compromise the effectiveness of therapy and result in discrepancy between the prescribed
and actual delivered therapy.815, 820, 839, 856-861
A multifaceted quality improvement initiative significantly improved effective
treatment time by focusing on minimizing avoidable downtime.1044 Another single center
quality improvement study that leveraged a local EHR showed marked improvement in
305

CRRT dose-intensity standardization and reduced week-to-week variation.832 Similarly, a
staged multifaceted quality improvement project that included the development of a
multidisciplinary team, use of a standardized CRRT protocol, implementation of quality
measures, and an educational initiative was shown to substantially improve delivered CRRT
dose-intensity, prolong filter lifespan, reduce CRRT access alarms, and realize meaningful
cost savings.833 These initiatives profile the importance of having key performance and
quality indicators that measure baseline practice and gauge iterative improvement over time
(Table 55).
Table 55 | Key quality/performance measures of CRRT1042
Operational definition

Proposed
benchmarks*

CRRT leadership

Dedicated CRRT physician/nurse dyad

100%

Proportion of CRRT providers with certified training

>90%

Proportion of unplanned filter exchanges

<50%

24 hours - CRRT run-time/24 hours

<15%

Number of access alarms/day

<3

Median prescribed dose-intensity

20-25 ml/kg/h

Proportion of treatments delivered at recommended
dose (20-25 ml/kg/h)

>85%

Delivered/prescribed ultrafiltration

>85%

Counts and rates of significant adverse events

<1 per CRRTday/week

CRRT education
Filter life
Downtime (daily)
Access alarms
Dose-intensity

Ultrafiltration

R

Adverse events

AF
T

CRRT key
performance
indications

RRT discontinuation RRT liberation (RRT independent)

>75%

ICU mortality

>50%

Patient survival to ICU discharge (%)

D

*Benchmarks are proposed and should be individualized by acute RRT programs. CRRT, continuous
renal replacement therapy; ICU, intensive care unit; RRT, renal replacement therapy

5.11 RRT with extracorporeal life support (ECLS)
Practice Point 5.11.1: Strategies for integration of RRT into existing circuits in patients
receiving extracorporeal life support (ECLS) depend on clinical context, local expertise,
and available technology and resources.
ECLS (e.g., extracorporeal membrane oxygenation [ECMO], extracorporeal carbon
dioxide removal [ECCO2R], and ventricular assist devices [VAD]) is a long-established
cardiopulmonary life support therapy used to manage patients with life-threatening refractory
cardiogenic shock or acute respiratory failure.1048-1051 It is associated with a high risk for
AKI, in both children and adults.1052-1054 Up to 40% of children and 30% of adults receiving
ECLS concomitantly receive RRT.1053, 1055, 1056 CRRT is the predominant modality used
306

during ECLS in both children and adults.1057, 1058 The most common indication for RRT
during ECLS is fluid accumulation and fluid overload that is refractory to or is perceived to
be inadequately managed by medical therapy.1057, 1059, 1060
There are techniques to introduce RRT for patients also receiving ECLS.1059, 1061-1063
These generally include: 1) dedicated and independent RRT access and circuit (parallel); 2)
integration of a hemofilter directly into the ECLS circuit (in-line hemofilter); 3) integration
of a full CRRT device/circuit into the ECLS circuit (series).

AF
T

RRT can be provided through a conventional dedicated dialysis catheter in a separate
central vein that will run in parallel with the ECLS circuit.1059, 1062, 1063 This configuration has
the advantages of RRT being operated and delivered in a standard manner, not having issues
with differential access pressures when combined with the ECLS circuit and the option of
prescribing/delivering solute clearance and ultrafiltration as per standard protocols and
procedures. This technique can allow the dedicated use of standard anticoagulation (e.g.,
RCA). Moreover, there should be no concern for the ECLS circuit if the CRRT circuit
requires interruption or change. A downside is the need for separate vascular access.

D

R

Alternatively, RRT can be integrated into the ECLS circuit through a variety of
techniques. A simple and relatively inexpensive method is the direct introduction (in-line) of
the hemofilter into the ECLS circuit.1057, 1060 For the in-line configuration, the hemofilter is
typically integrated after the ECLS blood pump to provide positive pressure into the
hemofilter and before blood flow enters the membrane lung (oxygenator). (Figure 18) This
technique will require minimal expansion of the extracorporeal blood volume; however, it
can present challenges with monitoring (e.g., no access pressure alarms), external infusion
pumps are necessary to deliver replacement solutions, and it may not enable precision control
of ultrafiltration.1059, 1062-1064

307

AF
T

Figure 18 | Configuration of in-line hemofilter integration into ECLS circuit.1062 ECLS,
extracorporeal life support

R

Another option is the integration of a commercially available CRRT device into the
ECLS circuit.1059, 1062, 1063 This configuration will enable superior control of dose-intensity
and ultrafiltration compared to an in-line configuration. A drawback of this technique relates
to the challenges with CRRT access pressures.1065-1067 ECLS circuit pressures are negative
before the blood pump and positive between blood pump and membrane lung.1059 These
pressures can exceed the operational limits for CRRT devices and may contribute to frequent
pressure alarms and potential complications in both circuits. As aforementioned, to prevent
systemic embolization of air/clots, the CRRT should be integrated after the ECLS blood
pump and before the membrane lung.1059

D

Finally, it is also possible to connect the CRRT circuit using the existing inlet and
outlet Luer locks in the membrane lung (Figure 19).1062, 1063, 1067 This configuration will
circumvent the access pressure issues and enable delivery of dose-intensity and
ultrafiltration.
Combined ECMO-RRT support necessitates expertise, protocols and standardized
procedures to ensure all CRRT venous and arterial accesses are maintained in the correct
pressure ranges and do not disrupt the ECLS circuit.1059, 1065, 1066

308

AF
T

D

R

Figure 19 | Options of combining ECMO and CRRT circuits.1068 a. An in-line hemofilter
is integrated into the ECMO circuit. Replacement fluid is directly administered into the
ECMO circuit. Alternatively, dialysis fluid can be supplied in a counter-current position.
Replacement/dialysis fluid rates and ultrafiltration rates can be controlled via infusion
pumps. b. The CRRT device is connected to the patient through a separate catheter
independent of the ECMO circuit. c. The access (inlet) and the return (outlet) lines of the
CRRT device are connected before the centrifugal blood pump (low-pressure part) of the
ECMO circuit. d. Both the access and the return lines of the CRRT device are connected
after the blood pump. e. The access line of the CRRT device is connected after the blood
pump (high-pressure), while the CRRT return line is connected before the centrifugal blood
pump. f. The access line of the CRRT device is connected directly after the membrane
oxygenator, while the return line is connected directly before the oxygenator. CRRT,
continuous renal replacement therapy; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.
All configurations have potential serious risks, including air embolism, hemolysis,
and formation of blood clots. There is no clear evidence that any specific configuration is
superior in terms of outcomes or safety. However, if a centrifugal pump is used, it is
preferable to connect the CRRT device after the pump because of the risk of drawing air into
the ECMO circuit. The Extracorporeal Life Support Organization (ELSO) have published
guidelines on the management of AKI and fluid overload during ECLS, along with technical
309

guidance and considerations for RRT.1059 The decision on the precise configuration of RRT
and ECLS should be guided by local expertise, experience and the implementation of
standardized protocols and procedures.
Practice Point 5.11.2: Most patients receiving ECLS have concomitant hemodynamic
instability. For these patients, initial support with CRRT rather than IRRT may be
preferential.

AF
T

Survey and observational data show that most ECLS patients with AKI who need
RRT receive CRRT.1057, 1060, 1069 The rationale for CRRT is driven by most ECLS patients
having high illness acuity, hemodynamic instability, and multiorgan dysfunction.1048, 1055, 1056,
1061 Fluid accumulation and overload is the primary trigger for RRT in most patients
receiving ECLS.1057, 1059, 1060 While all modalities of RRT can be delivered during ECLS,
these critically ill patients are less likely to tolerate the more rapid shifts in metabolic profile
and faster ultrafiltration that will occur with IRRT. CRRT has the advantage of enabling
consistent and continuous fluid removal with reduced risk of fluctuations that may disrupt the
ECLS blood flow.
Practice Point 5.11.3: Fluid accumulation that is refractory to medical therapy
independent of kidney function may be a reasonable indication for RRT in patients
receiving ECLS.

D

R

Fluid accumulation and overload with and without AKI is associated with worse
clinical outcomes, including mortality and longer durations of organ support and ICU
stay.432, 1014, 1070-1073 While regimens of diuretic therapy can be used to manage fluid,
individual response in patients can be inconsistent and insufficient to meet fluid balance
targets. Medically refractory fluid accumulation is a reasonable indications for starting
RRT.1059, 1074-1076 Fluid accumulation and overload are recognized indication for RRT
initiation among critically ill children receiving ECLS.1057, 1060 In these patients, achieving a
negative fluid balance can be associated with improved oxygenation.1077
5.12. Considerations specific for children
5.12.1 Starting renal replacement therapy (RRT)
Practice Point 5.12.1.1: In critically ill children with severe AKI, RRT initiation within
2 days of intensive care unit (ICU) admission or AKI onset should be considered as it
may be associated with improved outcome.
AKI is a recognized risk factor among children for escalation in care intensity (e.g., mechanical
ventilation; RRT) and adverse outcomes, including mortality and long-term health complications (e.g.,
neurocognitive and functional impairment, hypertension, CKD).1017, 1078-1087 Randomized trials
investigating early versus standard/delayed initiation of RRT have only been performed in adults.
However, the increased risks of catheter and therapy-specific risks of RRT with early RRT initiation
310

observed in RCTs of adults are likely generalizable to children. RRT initiation translates into an
escalation in care intensity, complexity, and costs. For acutely and critically ill children with persistent
severe AKI and/or fluid overload, these burdens of starting RRT may be balanced by reductions in
durations of invasive organ support (i.e., mechanical ventilation; ECLS) or lengths of ICU or hospital
stay. Durations >48 hours after ICU admission or AKI onset to the start of RRT among critically ill
children with AKI have shown an association with MAKE90.732, 1088, 1089
In low- and middle-resource settings, the capacity for and options to provide acute RRT
may be reduced, including limited access to critical care services and/or selected acute RRT
modalities. A “PD first” approach has been successful in pediatric centers in low- and middleresource settings with locally produced PD fluids and repurposing of different catheters. 789, 1090

AF
T

The timing and indications for starting RRT among children, particularly among those
with critical illness and persistent severe AKI warrant further evaluation. 1089, 1091 Among
selected case-mix (e.g., complex congenital cardiac surgery) and circumstances (e.g., ECLS),
decision-making may be driven by rapid evolution in clinical status, acuity, perceived
complications compounded by AKI, and need for concomitant therapeutic support (e.g., ability
to provide adequate nutrition1092, 1093), justifying earlier start to RRT or initiation in the absence
of conventional indications or AKI and related complications that were evaluated in RCTs
focused on critically ill adults with AKI. Adoption and implementation of these practice points
should be further studied and be guided by process-based quality assurance.831
Practice Point 5.12.1.2: In critically ill children, isolated fluid overload can be an
indication for RRT initiation.

D

R

Fluid accumulation and overload in children with and without AKI are associated with
adverse outcomes and greater health resource use (e.g., prolongation of mechanical ventilation;
longer lengths of stay).432, 1094-1096 Children with AKI commonly accumulate fluid, and many,
though not all, have coexisting fluid overload.1097
A proposed definition of fluid overload is the presence of “a pathologic state of positive
fluid balance associated with a clinically observable event(s), which may vary by age, casemix, acuity, and phase of illness”.1098 While there may be no universal threshold of fluid
balance to define fluid overload across all acute and critically ill children or for use as a trigger
for RRT initiation1094, 1099, adverse outcomes associated with fluid overload (with or without
AKI), prolonged oligo-anuria, and the need for precise fluid management are frequent
indications for starting RRT in acute and critically ill children.1091, 1099, 1100 Based on
observational studies in children, fluid overload is considered an important indication for RRT
initiation that has been associated with clinical outcomes. There remains uncertainty about
whether RRT and the relative timing of initiation of RRT can modify the risks of adverse
outcomes associated with AKI and/or fluid overload in children.166

311

The strategy of early PD initiation to prevent fluid overload among high-risk children
undergoing cardiac surgery has shown variable results for time to achieve target fluid
balance, durations of mechanical ventilation, and ICU length of stay, risk of adverse events,
and mortality when compared to conservative management, including the use of diuretic
therapy.1101-1106
5.12.2. RRT modality
Practice Point 5.12.2.1: Acute PD is an acceptable RRT modality and may be preferable
to CRRT for children in select circumstances.

D

R

AF
T

There have been limited direct comparisons of RRT modalities for AKI in
children;1107, 1108 however, secular trends have shown greater utilization of CRRT and IRRT
over time, with reductions in use of acute PD, 1109 likely in part related to the introduction of
miniaturized devices aimed to provide RRT in acute and critically ill children (Table 56). 11101113 However, PD is an acceptable RRT modality for selected children with AKI or with
complications of fluid accumulation, in low- and middle-resource settings, and in
circumstances when extracorporeal RRT is contraindicated or not possible. In pediatric AKI,
acute PD is often favored due to the smaller blood volumes and lower tolerance for rapid
hemodynamic changes in children. Additionally, peritoneal access via a catheter does not
require anticoagulation and is vessel sparing, avoiding catheter associated thrombi commonly
seen in younger children. There has been only one small single-center RCT comparing acute
continuous PD to daily IHD among 136 critically ill children (age 1 month to 16 years) with
AKI.1108 While azotemic control and rates of complications were similar between the groups,
children allocated to acute PD had significantly higher survival at 30 days compared to
children receiving IHD (60.7% vs. 36.5%, P=0.019). Among those allocated to IHD, death
was most often associated with cardiac failure, sepsis, hypotension, and disequilibrium
syndrome. The remaining literature on acute PD in children has focused specifically on the
population undergoing cardiac surgery and most often compares either PD catheter
placement alone with or without acute PD versus conservative (non-RRT) measures, such as
the use of furosemide, to manage perioperative fluid balance.1101-1105, 1114

312

Table 56 | Summary of parameters for RRT modalities in critically ill children

QB
(ml/kg/min)
Mechanism
for solute
transport
UFNET
(ml/kg/h)

IHD

SCUF

CVVH

CVVHD

CVVHDF

PD

5–8

3–5

3–5

3–5

3–5

N/A

Diffusion*

Convection

Convection

Diffusion

Diffusion &
convection

Diffusion

0–2.5

0–2.5

0–2.5

0–2.5

0–2.5

Variable

AF
T

Individualize
d sometimes
8–20 ml/kg or
exceeding
800–1100
QD (ml/kg/h) QD/QB >2:1 to
N/A
N/A
20–30
20–30
ml/m2 per
maximize
exchange
urea
clearance
QR (ml/kg/h)
Variable
N/A
20–30
0
20–30
0
*Diffusion ± convection when used with hemodiafiltration. CVVH, continuous venovenous
hemofiltration; CVVHD, continuous venovenous hemodialysis; CVVHDF, continuous venovenous
hemodiafiltration; IHD, intermittent hemodialysis; N/A, not applicable; PD, peritoneal dialysis; QB, blood
flow rate; QD, dialysis flow rate; QR, replacement fluid rate; RRT, renal replacement therapy; SCUF, slow
continuous ultrafiltration; UFNET, net ultrafiltration

R

5.12.3. RRT dose-intensity
Practice Point 5.12.3.1: An initial CRRT effluent volume for children can be 25–30
ml/kg/h. Thereafter, dose-intensity can be adjusted based on the adequacy of correction
of electrolyte, acid-base, and metabolic derangements.

D

There are no RCTs to support a target RRT dose-intensity for acutely ill or critically
ill children. Due to limited comparisons of outcomes according to delivered RRT doseintensity in children, this practice has generally been extrapolated from findings of RCTs
performed in adult populations.815, 820
Practice Point 5.12.3.2: The dose-intensity prescription in children receiving CRRT
should be weight-based (ml/kg/h), according to either body weight at hospital or ICU
admission or ideal body weight and not prescribed based on body surface area.
The optimal initial RRT dose-intensity in children is unknown. Survey data have
shown variation in practice, with both weight-based and body surface area (BSA)-based
methods commonly used.938, 1091 Importantly, the relationship between body weight and BSA
in children is nonlinear, presenting challenges in translating and aligning prescribed doseintensity between these methods, driven by large differences in age, body weight, and body
morphology across the spectrum of children encountered. For example, in neonates and
infants, an initial CRRT dose-intensity based on BSA of 2 l/h per 1.73 m2, common in survey
313

data, could translate to an unintended much higher weight-based CRRT dose-intensity of 70–
100 ml/kg/h.1091 This reinforces the necessity for routine and frequent monitoring of CRRT
(Practice Point 5.3.2 and Practice Point 5.12.3.1). Moreover, body weight at the time CRRT
is initiated may be confounded and unreliable due to acute illness and fluid accumulation,
implying body weight at hospital or ICU admission, or ideal body weight be preferentially
used.
Practice Point 5.12.3.3: In children with AKI, PD can be initiated with a fill volume of
10–20 ml/kg and short cycle times (60–90 minutes), with gradual increases in volume
and dwell time as tolerated, with continuous therapy over 24 hours for the first 1–3
days to achieve solute clearance and fluid balance goals.

AF
T

The issue of prescribing and achieving adequate clearance using acute PD in children
with AKI was specifically addressed in the 2020 updated ISPD Guideline for PD in AKI
(Pediatric).776 This practice point aligns with this guideline. Age is an important determinant
of RRT modality selection in critically ill children, with many children under age 6 years
receiving acute PD.776 Acute PD can generally provide sufficient metabolic, azotemic and
volume control for most children, including those who are hypercatabolic.1115 Initial fill
volumes of 10–20 ml/kg are recommended to reduce the risk of dialysate leakage.1116
Thereafter, fill volume can be slowly increased to optimize solute clearance and
ultrafiltration. While initial dwell and drain times should be every 60–90 minutes, in extreme
and very-low birth weight infants, lower fill volumes (7–14 ml) and shorter dwell times (10–
20 minutes) may be necessary.1117

D

R

Practice Point 5.12.3.4: Augmentation of initial RRT dose-intensity for CRRT is
warranted when treating children with hyperammonemia. CRRT dose-intensity up to
200 ml/kg/h may be acceptable to achieve adequate clearance of ammonia. Children
should be appropriately monitored for unintended solute losses during periods of
augmented CRRT dose-intensity.
Ammonia can be generated in excess due to inborn errors of metabolism, poisoning,
sepsis, or acute liver failure. Ammonia is a neurotoxin and accumulation can precipitate
metabolic encephalopathy, cerebral edema, or death. 1118, 1119 Serum ammonia concentrations
>100 µmol/l reliably predict severe encephalopathy among patients with acute liver
failure.1120 As such, hyperammonemia is a recognized indication for RRT.754, 1091, 1121-1128
IRRT can efficiently clear ammonia and is dependent on blood flow rate, dialysate flow rate,
and hemofilter surface characteristics; however, use of short-term IRRT sessions may result
in rebound elevation in serum ammonia.1127, 1129, 1130 Extracorporeal clearance of ammonia
using initial high dose-intensity CRRT (total effluent flow >75–90 ml/kg/h) has shown
capacity to achieve 50% reduction in serum ammonia concentrations within 4–9 hours.1119,
1127, 1131, 1132
A biphasic CRRT dose-intensity strategy may mitigate the risk of cerebral
1118
edema.
CRRT (CVVHDF) has been recommended for children with serum ammonia
314

>400–500 µmol/l and not responsive after 4 hours of aggressive medical therapy (e.g.,
protein restriction; ammonia chelation).1127, 1133
5.12.4. Catheters for RRT
Practice Point 5.12.4.1: In small children, including neonates with small vessel size, use
of a pliable cuffed catheter, as compared to a rigid temporary catheter, may be less
thrombogenic and preferred, even when the expected dialysis duration is uncertain.
The cuff can be left outside the body when the projected duration of use is short.

AF
T

In neonates and small children requiring RRT for AKI, vascular access poses
significant challenges due to the small caliber of blood vessels, limited available access sites,
and a heightened risk of access-related complications. In this context, the use of a soft,
pliable, cuffed catheter, rather than a rigid, temporary catheter, may provide superior safety
and performance, even when the anticipated duration of RRT is uncertain. Rigid nontunneled
catheters, which are commonly used in adults, may be less appropriate for small children
because of an increased risk of mechanical trauma to fragile vessels, higher thrombogenicity
in low-flow states, and limited flexibility that can lead to malposition or kinking.913, 1134

R

In contrast, pliable cuffed catheters made of softer materials such as silicone or
polyurethane are associated with reduced endothelial injury and a lower risk of thrombosis,
improved catheter patency in small vessels, and greater flexibility and comfort, all of which
help to minimize mechanical complications.1134 Although these catheters are typically
designed for long-term use, they may still offer advantages in short-term settings for neonates
and infants, especially in cases where vessel preservation is a priority. When short-term use
is anticipated, the catheter cuff can be left external to the skin to avoid subcutaneous
tunneling and to facilitate easier removal.1135 Additionally, cuffed catheters offer improved
securement and stability, which is especially important in infants and young children who are
more prone to accidental dislodgement.

D

5.12.5. Anticoagulation for RRT
Practice Point 5.12.5.1: In children requiring small catheters and circuit volume and
lower blood flow rates, anticoagulation is often necessary and preferred over no
anticoagulation during CRRT.
In critically ill children receiving CRRT, the use of anticoagulation is often necessary
due to the unique technical challenges posed by smaller catheter sizes, reduced
extracorporeal circuit volumes, and lower blood flow rates. These factors contribute to an
increased risk of circuit clotting and premature filter failure in the absence of
anticoagulation.1136, 1137 Data from a multicenter European observational cohort study
including 247 children undergoing CRRT with 1357 circuits totaling 37,562 treatment hours
(EurAKID registry) demonstrated that shorter circuit lifespan in children is influenced by

315

reduced circuit size and flow dynamics, both of which are more prone to clotting without
adequate anticoagulant support.1137
Brophy et al. conducted a multicenter evaluation highlighting how anticoagulation,
particularly RCA or UFH, used during CRRT significantly improved filter lifespan and
reduced clotting events compared to circuits managed without anticoagulation. 1136 Further, in
a study of 161 children receiving CRRT (total 22,190 hours; median 74.8 hours per patient),
filter lifespan was significantly shorter for CRRT without anticoagulation, especially in
younger children and those with lower blood flow settings.1138

AF
T

5.12.6. Hemofilters for RRT
Practice Point 5.12.6.1: Appropriately sized membranes proportional to body surface
area are preferred for children with AKI receiving CRRT or IRRT.
In children with AKI receiving CRRT or IRRT, selecting a filter membrane with a
surface area proportionate to the child’s body surface area is essential to ensure both
treatment efficacy and safety. Children, particularly neonates and infants, have lower
circulating blood volumes and limited tolerance for extracorporeal circuits. Oversized
membranes can significantly increase extracorporeal volume, raising the risk of
hemodynamic instability, hypothermia, and the need for blood priming.1139

R

Coulthard and Sharp examined the feasibility and challenges of hemodialysis in very
small infants, including those weighing as little as 2.5 kg. They described the use of
extracorporeal circuits with a volume of approximately 25 ml.1139 Given that the estimated
total blood volume in infants is around 80 ml/kg, a 2.5 kg infant would have a total blood
volume of about 200 ml. Thus, the extracorporeal volume represents approximately 12.5% of
the infant’s total blood volume. This relatively high proportion poses significant risk for
hemodynamic instability and necessitates the use of blood priming.1139

D

Using an oversized membrane can lead to an increase in extracorporeal circuit
volume, which may exceed 8–10 ml/kg and increase the risk of hemodynamic instability,
particularly in neonates and small children.1140 Additionally, large membranes, even with
blood priming, can cause dilutional coagulopathy, with reductions in platelet and fibrinogen
levels due to large extracorporeal volumes. Larger membranes are also associated with
higher RRT-related macro- and micronutrient losses.1141, 1142
Conversely, undersized membranes may compromise RRT adequacy. Therefore,
proportional membrane sizing is a critical component of safe and effective CRRT delivery in
pediatric patients.1091 In the EurAKID registry, longer hemofilter lifespan was associated
with use of RCA (42 h for RCA vs. 24 h for UFH versus 18 h for no anticoagulant, P=0.001),
larger membrane surface area, and right internal jugular access (compared with left internal
jugular).1137 Notably, smaller dialyzers (membrane surface area <0.5 m2) had shorter
316

lifespans (19 h; IQR: 14–32) than both medium (membrane surface area 0.5–1.0 m2–26 h;
IQR: 16–43, P=0.04) and large dialyzers (membrane surface area >1.0 m2–33 h; IQR: 20–48,
P<0.001).1137

AF
T

Pediatric-specific CRRT machines and miniaturized circuits are available and have
received regulatory approval. In the absence of direct comparative pediatric studies, selection
of CRRT platforms should prioritize overall biocompatibility, low extracorporeal circuit
volume, and suitability for patient size. When available, hemofilters with validated safety
data in small children are preferred.1107, 1110, 1112, 1143 If higher solute clearance is required,
membrane surface area may be increased as clinically indicated. Importantly, the advantages
of pediatric-specific CRRT platforms extend beyond filter size alone. Appropriately scaled
machines are designed to allow precise and reliable fluid balance control, which is
particularly critical in neonates and small children, where even minimal fluid deviations may
be clinically significant. In addition, these systems support lower blood flow rates, which
may reduce shear stress, limit blood–surface interaction and potentially decrease the risk of
hemolysis and inflammation. Together, these features may enhance the safety, feasibility,
and tolerability of CRRT in small pediatric patients and should be considered when selecting
CRRT technology for this population.
5.12.7. Ultrafiltration in RRT
Practice Point 5.12.7.1: In children, net ultrafiltration (UFNET) should not exceed 2.5
ml/kg/h. Frequent assessment of fluid balance (i.e., every 4-6 hours) should be
undertaken to evaluate tolerance for fluid removal and adjust fluid balance goals, as
necessary.

D

R

Fluid overload is a frequent indication for CRRT initiation in critically ill children
and associated with adverse outcomes.996, 1009, 1071, 1075, 1076 Limited data in critically ill
children with AKI, particularly among those with fluid overload >20% of body weight,
suggest early net negative fluid balance after CRRT initiation may modify outcome. 996
Similar to adults, there is concern that high UFNET in children may contribute to dialysisinduced kidney injury and be associated with adverse outcomes.1008 Thadani et al. evaluated
the association of net fluid balance after CRRT initiation in 371 critically ill children, mostly
with AKI.1008 Those who achieved a net negative fluid balance had more CRRT-free days
and lower risk of MAKE30. Moreover, children maintaining urine output ≥0.3 ml/kg/h over
the study period were found to have 5.6 more CRRT-free days and a decreased rate of
MAKE. Preservation of urine output has been shown as a potentially important indicator of
UFNET intensity and associated with CRRT liberation.1144
An upper UFNET threshold <2.5 ml/kg/h has been suggested to minimize the risk of
adverse events attributable to ultrafiltration and facilitate safe fluid removal among critically
ill children. Frequent assessment and adjustment of UFNET and fluid balance targets among
critically ill children are essential to mitigate risk of harm.
317

5.12.8. Discontinuation of RRT
Practice Point 5.12.8.1: Urine output exceeding >0.5 ml/kg/h over 6 hours can indicate
resolution of AKI and be used to predict successful RRT discontinuation in children.

AF
T

Critically ill children receiving CRRT are characterized by a high burden of
multiorgan dysfunction, beyond AKI and fluid overload.758 Surveillance of practice has
suggested the most important factors used by healthcare professionals when deciding to
discontinue CRRT among critically ill children are urine output and resolution of fluid
overload.891 Relatively few studies have focused on factors predictive of successful RRT
discontinuation. An analysis of the multinational WE-ROCK study evaluated predictors of
successful CRRT discontinuation, defined as no reinitiation of RRT for ≥72 hours in 622
critically ill children.1144 In this large cohort, only 54% of children successfully discontinued
CRRT. Several factors were associated with successful CRRT discontinuation, including
variables prior to CRRT initiation (higher urine output), variables at the time of CRRT
initiation (higher Vasoactive-Inotropic Score; higher Pediatric Logistic Organ Dysfunction-2
score) and a shorter total CRRT duration.

D

R

In addition, a single-center retrospective study reinforced the prognostic value of
urine output when predicting successful CRRT discontinuation in children. In a cohort of 99
critically ill children who underwent a trial off CRRT, urine output ≥0.5 ml/kg/h in the 6
hours prior to stopping CRRT predicted successful discontinuation (AUC: 0.72, 95% CI:
0.60–0.84, P=0.0009), defined as no reinitiation of CRRT for ≥7 days.1145 Notably, this
association remained significant after adjustment for diuretic exposure. Preserved urine
output (>0.3 ml/kg/h) and a net negative fluid balance during CRRT were associated with
achieving more RRT-free days and lower MAKE30 (adjusted OR: 0.16; 95% CI: 0.09–0.29)
in a retrospective cohort of 371 critically ill children. 1008 Children who did not successfully
discontinue RRT had longer ICU stays and higher in-hospital mortality.1008

318

CHAPTER 6. FOLLOW-UP CARE AFTER AKI OR AKD
Robust epidemiological data have revealed that people with CKD are at increased risk
of AKI, and those who survive AKI and/or AKD face heightened long-term risks of CKD,
cardiovascular events, recurrent AKI, and premature mortality, confirming a bidirectional
relationship between AKI, AKD and CKD. Emerging evidence suggests that systematic
approaches to post-AKI care, including nephrology follow-up, medication optimization, and
structured surveillance protocols, may mitigate some of these adverse outcomes. This chapter
synthesizes recent advances in management post-AKI/AKD and follow-up care to improve
long-term outcomes.

AF
T

6.1 Planning follow-up care with people after AKI and/or AKD
Recommendation 6.1.1: We recommend coordinated follow-up for children and adults
after AKI and/or AKD, with personalized care according to individual clinical context
and vulnerability risks (1B).

D

R

This recommendation places a high value on the potential benefits of individualized risk
assessment to deliver personalized care for children and adults following an episode of
illness affected by AKI and/or AKD. There is consistent evidence that AKD and all stages of
AKI are associated with adverse long-term outcomes. The recommendation recognizes that
people affected by AKI and/or AKD are heterogenous with varying needs and priorities. As a
clinical syndrome, AKI offers an opportunity to improve systems of care and outcomes for
people living with complex health needs. To achieve this, the recommendation encourages
healthcare professionals, patients (and carers), researchers, and policy makers to consider
implementing strategies that maximize the clinical utility of AKI as a marker of systemic
vulnerability and adverse outcomes, while minimizing the potential for treatment and
workload burden. There is insufficient evidence favoring one provider type or model of care
over any other; consequently, individual patient, healthcare professional, and local system
factors, including availability and expertise, are likely the best drivers of these decisions.
Key information
Balance of benefits and harms.
There is extensive evidence that AKI/AKD is associated with poor outcomes. 59, 61, 1017,
1146-1154 Relevant health outcomes for children and adults with AKI and/or AKD go beyond
the initial episode of acute illness with a need to plan timely and tailored follow-up care to
reduce the risks, in the short, medium, and long-term, of adverse kidney and non-kidney
outcomes (Table 57). Reducing the risk of all-cause hospital readmission and mortality are
immediate outcomes for consideration.1155, 1156 Longer term adverse outcomes include de
novo CKD, CKD progression, kidney failure, and further episodes of AKI,1150, 1157 as well as
development of hypertension and cardiovascular disease (CVD). Physical, psychological, and
social support are also central to improving functional status and QoL.1158-1161 In addition, a
systematic review that compared the out-of-pocket payments for various conditions identified
319

D

R

AF
T

kidney disease, including AKI. as the leading cause of catastrophic health expenditure across
lower-resource settings.742

320

D
R

AF
T

Table 57 | Monitoring for adverse outcomes after AKI and/or AKD requiring follow-up care
Domain
Outcome
Population
Rationale for follow-up
Within 3 months
Kidney health
Proteinuria/albuminuria,
Children and adults Proteinuria/albuminuria: Marker of sustained damage. Readily
kidney function
available, underutilized
Kidney function: need early evaluation of kidney function,
especially in cases of incomplete resolution of AKI where further
diagnostic testing may be warranted, or where kidney function
remains dynamic at time of discharge
Cardiovascular
Hypertension, decompensated Children and adults Hypertension: Common post-AKI sequela, may be underhealth
heart failure
recognized without regular monitoring, especially in pediatrics.
Decompensated heart failure: Common cause of readmission postAKI
Physical function
Physical deconditioning,
Children and adults ICU stay and AKI-associated immobility may impair functional
reduced mobility
recovery.
Psychosocial
PTSD, anxiety, family
Children and adults AKI and ICU exposure are associated with increased mental
distress
health challenges and caregiver burden.
Healthcare
Increased rehospitalizations,
Children and adults AKI increases healthcare utilization, especially in medically
utilization
medication burden
complex pediatric cases.
Quality of life
Impact on quality of life,
Children and adults Consequences of AKI can affect quality of life and well-being,
especially in case of
including that of caregivers.
progressive CKD and longterm dialysis dependence
At 3 months or beyond
Kidney health
Development and/or
Children and adults AKI is a risk factor for CKD; risk stratification may differ by age.
progression of CKD,
Proteinuria/albuminuria: predictor of progression of kidney
proteinuria/albuminuria
disease. Readily available, underutilized
Cardiovascular
Hypertension, heart failure,
Predominantly
AKI is an independent risk factor for CVD and hospital
cardiovascular events
adults
readmission, particularly readmissions with acute pulmonary
edema.
Neurocognitive
Neurodevelopmental delay,
Predominantly
AKI increases the risk of delirium in adults and may contribute to
function
cognitive impairment,
children
long-term brain health issues in pediatric survivors.
behavioral challenges
Growth and
Growth delay, malnutrition
Children
Undernutrition and fluid imbalance during AKI may impair linear
nutrition
growth.
321

Socioeconomic

Loss of job security or gainful
employment

Predominantly
adults but also
affects parents of
children with AKI

AKI-related disability or chronic health issues may impair
workforce return and contribute to financial insecurity.
In countries where patients pay for medical treatment, AKI-related
costs can lead to rapid impoverishment.

D
R

AF
T

AKD, acute kidney disease; AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CVD, cardiovascular disease; ICU, intensive care
unit; PTSD, post-traumatic stress syndrome

322

AF
T

Acute management of AKI and/or AKD without coordinated planning of timely
follow-up care has the potential to exacerbate patient harm. Risks in the short-term include
the potential for unplanned hospital readmission due to inadequate early post-AKI clinical
assessment (including BP and fluid status to ensure euvolemia) following suspension of
diuretics and other cardiovascular medication during an episode of acute illness;1162 failure to
ensure ongoing monitoring and management for people without resolution of AKI/AKD; and
inadequate follow-up to address underlying causes and vulnerabilities (e.g., frailty, social
needs including limited access to housing, food, transportation, and financial stability).1159,
1161 In the longer-term, potential harms might stem from inadequate evaluation for CKD and
ongoing assessment to determine the risks and benefits of initiating or restarting drugs of
cardiovascular prognostic benefit, particularly in adults.1163-1166 Without a comprehensive
approach that entails patient engagement, which places AKI in the context of supporting a
person’s physical and mental health to enable recovery in social functioning, there remains a
risk that post-AKI care may result in unnecessary treatment burden and duplication of clinical
workload.1158, 1159, 1166-1170
Potential psychosocial harms from clinical reassessment following AKI have been
reported by patients and include the treatment burden of post-hospitalization care resulting
from additional clinic visits, strain on patients and caregivers, and financial pressure because
of medical expenses.1169 Patients have described anxiety from competing health demands as
challenges.1168 Approaches that alleviate treatment burden while implementing a
comprehensive model of care may be more acceptable.

D

R

The systematic review for this guideline identified that interventions to implement
comprehensive post-AKI care were associated with reduced mortality (1 RCT and 3
observational studies; RR: 0.75; 95% CI: 0.70–0.81) and a reduced risk of CKD requiring
maintenance dialysis (one observational study, HR: 0.58; 95% CI: 0.54–0.62), with uncertain
effects on other outcomes (Supplementary Table S92).1171-1174 In an RCT, 98 participants
with AKI were randomized to comprehensive multidisciplinary nephrology care (5 visits)
versus standard care for 12 months post-discharge.1173 Nephrologists were the principal
physicians providing coordination with other healthcare professionals to manage all transition
care post-AKI. This trial reported better BP control and lower UACR in the nephrology care
group, but there was no difference in mean eGFR or other kidney outcomes between the 2
groups at one year.
Several observational studies have highlighted gaps in follow-up care processes for
children and adults affected by AKI/AKD, reflecting missed opportunities across healthcare
systems.1175, 1176 However, there remains limited trial-based evidence on models to enhance
implementation of these recommended actions. Meta-analysis combining 5 observational
studies and 1 RCT in adults found that nephrology follow-up was associated with a lower risk
of death (RR: 0.84; 95% CI: 0.76–0.93) and possibly lower risk of recurrent AKI (RR: 0.57;
95% CI: 0.33–1.01; Supplementary Table S93).1177-1179 In particular, one study reported that
among adults who had received temporary dialysis during an admission with AKI, early
nephrology follow-up was associated with lower mortality.1180 However, the observational
323

studies included in this review consistently found that adults who had nephrology follow-up
were more likely to ultimately receive maintenance dialysis (CKD G5D); the reason for this
is unclear, but may relate to unaccounted confounding with the likelihood that people with
more advanced kidney disease post-AKI may be more likely to be followed by a
nephrologist.1180

AF
T

Children with a history of AKI are also at increased risk for long-term kidney
sequelae, including recurrent AKI, proteinuria, hypertension, and progression to CKD, yet
most do not receive structured nephrology follow-up.1176 In a systematic review
encompassing over 6700 children with cardiac disease undergoing cardiac surgery,
subclinical injury markers, such as proteinuria and tubular damage biomarkers were common
after AKI, even without overt CKD, but nephrology follow-up occurred in fewer than 5% of
cases, underscoring the need for standardized surveillance protocols that incorporate risk
stratification by AKI severity and cardiac complexity, with long-term monitoring that extends
beyond SCr alone.1153
Certainty of evidence
There is moderate certainty of evidence that comprehensive care post-AKI in adults is
associated with reduced risk of death and maintenance dialysis (with low certainty of
evidence), with uncertain effects on other kidney-related outcomes.1171-1174 The certainty of
evidence was downgraded for methodological quality (including mostly nonrandomized
trials) and for maintenance dialysis, sparseness of studies. The overall certainty of evidence
was graded as moderate based primarily on certainty regarding mortality.

D

R

There is low certainty of evidence that follow-up by a nephrologist, specifically, in
adults post-AKI is associated with lower risk of death and possibly recurrent AKI; although,
with a higher incidence of maintenance dialysis reported among people seen by
nephrologists.1177-1179 The certainty of evidence was downgraded for methodological quality
of mostly observational studies.
No eligible studies were conducted in children. However, the Work Group felt that
the findings in the adult literature were applicable to pediatric populations and did not rate
the findings any lower for indirectness when applied to the pediatric population.
Values and preferences.
A systematic review of patient experiences has highlighted major challenges for
people following an episode of illness affected by AKI. Difficulties include navigating
fragmented systems of care after hospital discharge; reduced well-being with limited ability
to carry out daily activities; uncertainties surrounding resolution of AKI; dealing with
competing health priorities; and unsustainable treatment burden associated with ongoing
monitoring.1181, 1182 People often lack awareness of their AKI diagnosis.1169, 1183-1185
Supporting people during this period of vulnerability to gain confidence in self-management,
with a focus on understanding and optimizing kidney health protection strategies in the
324

context of addressing wider health and social needs, is a key element of follow-up care after
AKI and/or AKD.1169
Resource use and costs.
The systematic follow-up of AKI survivors is associated with increased resource use
entailing additional laboratory testing, a nephrology workforce as well as a range of
multidisciplinary healthcare professionals. This may lead to increased rates of
rehospitalization and referral through earlier detection of adverse events. These costs may be
offset by better longer-term outcomes for AKI survivors, although this has not yet been
proven in RCTs.

AF
T

Considerations for implementation.
Barriers to follow-up care include under-recognition of AKI by healthcare
professionals, lack of knowledge about the systemic and life-course impact of AKI by the
healthcare team, insufficient patient and healthcare professional knowledge about AKI and its
attendant risk, challenges integrating AKI and kidney health into the context of competing
priorities of care for comorbidities, a lack of evidence for effective interventions to improve
outcomes after AKI, and limited timely access to nephrology care. The role and resourcing of
primary care as well as the use of virtual or point-of-care follow-up strategies focused on
those at highest risk of short-term and long-term adverse outcomes may more effectively
target AKI survivors who are most likely to benefit but requires further evaluation.
Implementation should consider the use of approaches that alleviate treatment burden for
patients while delivering comprehensive and integrated models of care that improve patient
outcomes.

D

R

Rationale
AKI is a common, harmful and costly clinical syndrome. It is a marker of systemic
vulnerability, with evidence of adverse kidney and non-kidney outcomes across all stages of
AKI. Significant gaps have been identified in the post-discharge care of AKI survivors.1181
Prior research has demonstrated that several domains of care could be improved for followup care of people with AKI/AKD.
CKD assessment and management following AKI often falls short of best practices,
with many adults not receiving statins or RASi, despite evidence they can improve kidney
and cardiovascular outcomes.1165, 1186-1188 Recognition and follow-up of AKI after discharge
is poor due to deficits in communication about AKI, lack of healthcare professional
recognition of people at risk of adverse sequelae from AKI after hospital discharge, and an
already high burden of care and complexity due to comorbidities. Adults describe
prioritization of conditions other than AKI, variability in comprehension of the significance
of AKI and kidney health, and anxiety from discharge planning and competing health
demands, while healthcare professionals have identified care coordination and
communication as key challenges to providing effective care.1169, 1181

325

Appropriate clinical oversight is necessary to support the development and effective
communication of a discharge plan that clarifies the purpose and timing of clinical follow-up
including the implementation of kidney health protection strategies (e.g., monitoring of
kidney health status and medicines optimization). Furthermore, people affected by AKI often
feel vulnerable and in the context of reduced patient and system capacity may benefit from
support coordinating timely multiprofessional follow-up.1169 Organizing early clinical followup prior to discharge is necessary for those at high risk of hospital readmission. Clarity on the
purpose of follow-up at 3 months after discharge needs to be clearly communicated with
people affected by AKI/AKD and care professionals including those in primary care.

D

R

AF
T

Based upon best available evidence, consensus guidance highlights key actions
required to improve AKI and/or AKD aftercare in both high- and low-resource settings. To
maximize clinical utility and minimize treatment burden, AKI and/or AKD need to be placed
in clinical and social context with coordinated follow-up care needing to take into account:
patient-specific risk factors; characteristics of the AKI episode; and the degree of resolution
of AKI/AKD. A holistic approach considers the interaction between emotional, cognitive,
and social vulnerabilities with the severity of the illness event and underlying comorbidities
(Figure 20).1159

Figure 20 | Strategies to deliver holistic follow-up care with children and adults after
AKI/AKD.1159 AKD, acute kidney disease; AKI, acute kidney injury
AKD affects a substantial proportion of children following AKI, with reported
incidence ranging from 17% to >50%, and consistently predicts adverse outcomes, including
CKD. Risk factors for AKD and its progression include higher AKI severity and duration,
326

persistent oliguria, anemia, glomerulonephritis, tubulointerstitial nephritis, and the need for
RRT. Critically ill children have a particularly high burden of AKI and AKD. Importantly,
AKD is predictive of MAKE and reduced eGFR at both 90 days and longer-term follow-up,
even among children without prior AKI.62, 1189-1193 This suggests that AKD is a clinically
relevant, high-risk condition that warrants structured post-discharge monitoring to mitigate
progression to CKD in children.

AF
T

Special considerations
Adults with heart failure. Recognizing that a high proportion of readmissions relate to
people with pulmonary edema, post-AKI care needs to be aligned with and build on evidence
underpinning heart failure management.1155, 1156, 1194, 1195 In people with heart failure, caution
is necessary when interpreting kidney function tests (including changes in eGFR) as rises in
SCr are common and may reflect changes in hemodynamics (for instance, after initiation of
RASi or SGLT2i) rather than be due to intrinsic kidney injury.1196-1198 As such, placing
kidney function tests in clinical context is essential, with decongestion and assessment of
volume status to achieve “clinical euvolemia” being key elements of post-AKI care to
improve outcomes.1196
Practice Point 6.1.1: Transition of care from hospital to home requires clear
communication between inpatient and outpatient care teams, an identified healthcare
professional for AKI follow-up, and resources for patient engagement and education
about their kidney health and kidney health protection.

D

R

Incorporating specific kidney health protection plans into follow-up care pathways
requires communication between inpatient and outpatient healthcare professionals and
coordinated planning with integration between healthcare professionals and clinical services.
This may involve several healthcare professionals and other clinical services, such as
postoperative care teams, comprehensive geriatric assessments for frail individuals, oncology,
or heart failure services, in addition to primary care.
The timing of follow-up should be individualized based on patient-specific risk
factors, comorbidities, the characteristics of the AKI episode (e.g., severity and duration), and
the extent of AKI/AKD resolution. Guidance for CKD evaluation at 3 months post-AKI
(Section 6.4) should be communicated and coordinated with the appropriate healthcare
professional prior to hospital discharge. Early, coordinated follow-up is particularly important
for people who: have a high risk of hospital readmission due to comorbid conditions (e.g.,
heart failure, frailty) or a significant acute illness (e.g., episode of temporary RRT, ICU
admission); require early clinical review to assess BP, volume status, or to safely reintroduce
or dose adjust medications withheld during hospitalization or introduce new kidneyprotective medications; need early evaluation of kidney function, especially in cases of
incomplete resolution of AKI where further diagnostic testing may be warranted, or where
kidney function remains dynamic at time of discharge; and/or for people experiencing social
vulnerability, which may impact their ability to access or adhere to follow-up care.
327

Early follow-up appointments are ideally scheduled prior to hospital discharge to
ensure timely post-acute care. Care coordinators and/or nurse navigators can play a key role
in supporting care transitions by promoting continuity, delivering kidney health education,
and minimizing treatment burden from multiple healthcare professionals, while ensuring that
follow-up care remains aligned with the person’ goals, values, and preferences.1199 This
includes facilitating coordinated follow-up for patients discharged to other institutions,
rehabilitation, or convalescent facilities.
There is also growing literature and expert consensus supporting the involvement of
pharmacists, both in the inpatient and outpatient setting and in collaboration with primary
care teams, to enhance medication management and optimize follow-up care after
AKI/AKD.1200

AF
T

Practice Point 6.1.2: Provide discharge summaries for children and adults with AKI
that include details of the AKI episode, status of the resolution of AKI, medication
management, and follow-up plans with recommendations.

D

R

AKI is frequently under-recognized and poorly documented at discharge, especially in
children.1201, 1202 Studies have also shown that AKI is often not identified in primary care
records, leading to loss of the diagnosis during care transitions and limiting ongoing
management, including during future episodes of acute illness.1176, 1190, 1203 Most adults
affected by AKI are unclear on the diagnosis and its relevance. Caregivers for children may
also be unaware their child experienced AKI and targeted education is often lacking. In a
recent cross-sectional study, 75% of caregivers were unaware their child had experienced
AKI, and fewer than 40% recalled any discussion of kidney injury during the hospitalization.
Nephrology consultation improved recognition, but substantial knowledge gaps persisted
across services.1204 For both children and adults, standardized discharge summaries should
include details of the AKI episode, status of the resolution of AKI, medication management
including reasons for medication changes and guidance regarding if, when, and how to
initiate or restart drugs, with a follow-up plan outlining ongoing monitoring of kidney health
status.
Given the high frequency of comorbid conditions and multidisciplinary outpatient
care, effective information-sharing is essential, not only with general practitioners and
pediatricians providing primary care, but also with relevant subspecialists such as cardiology,
transplant, or oncology, including specialist nurses. Embedding kidney health monitoring into
these care pathways, along with clear guidance on when to refer back to nephrology, is
expected to enhance patient experience and continuity of care.1176
To address these major gaps in follow-up care, multiprofessional models that entail
early and ongoing patient education, beginning during admission and reinforced at follow-up
visits in primary care have been developed, with findings to date demonstrating
improvements in care processes and patients’ knowledge of kidney health.1205-1207
Furthermore, audit and feedback interventions in conjunction with multiprofessional
328

education, leading to the development of systems-level improvement plans show promise and
warrant further evaluation.1202, 1206, 1208, 1209
Practice Point 6.1.3: A comprehensive clinical assessment of children and adults
following an episode of illness affected by AKI/AKD includes assessment of blood
pressure (BP) and volume status, medication reconciliation/review, and kidney function
and albuminuria after hospital discharge.

AF
T

AKI survivors have a high rate of rehospitalization and significantly elevated risks of
major adverse cardiovascular and kidney events.207, 1146, 1160 Although interventional evidence
is currently low, a standardized approach to assessment may address observed care gaps in
AKI survivors. Informed by best available evidence, consensus work has provided guidance
regarding the timeliness and intensity of follow-up as well as “what” follow-up care after
AKI/AKD should entail. The Kidney function check, Advocacy, Medications, Pressure, Sick
day protocols (KAMPS) framework (Table 58) identifies key actions that support the health
and wellbeing of people who have had an AKI/AKD event.
Table 58 |.Post-AKI/AKD kidney health care framework1210
KAMPS Framework
Components
Kidney function check
Measure kidney function (e.g., serum creatinine or cystatin C), urinalysis,
assessment of albuminuria
Advocacy
Patient education about kidney function and AKI, what to expect in
resolution of AKI, and self-care strategies
Medications
Medication review and reconciliation
Pressure
Blood pressure evaluation and adherence to guideline-recommended targets
Patient information about how to self-manage medications in the event of
dehydration or acute illness
AKD, acute kidney disease; AKI, acute kidney injury

R

Sick day protocols

D

Comprehensive assessment of kidney function includes evaluation of eGFR (e.g.,
SCr, cystatin C) as well as albuminuria. BP control and volume assessment are particularly
important in the post-AKI period as antihypertensive medications and diuretics are frequently
stopped or modified during an AKI event.1211, 1212 A Canadian cohort study showed that heart
failure accounted for 13% of the primary hospital readmission diagnoses.1156, 1162, 1213, 1214 A
cohort study in Scotland found that 26.6% of rehospitalizations at 90-days related to acute
pulmonary edema.1155
Medication review, reconciliation, and adjustment, if necessary, can be provided by
many healthcare professionals, including pharmacists, and primary care physicians. The
original clinical indication for a drug should be reviewed. If a specific contraindication for a
drug has been identified, this should be documented and an alternative medication should be
considered.

329

Practice Point 6.1.4: Provide children and adults (and their caregivers) with a history of
AKI and/or AKD access to education about kidney health, sick day guidance and
kidney care, and psychosocial support to enhance functional status and quality of life.

AF
T

Patients and caregivers often lack awareness of the long-term consequences of
AKI/AKD and may not recognize the importance of ongoing monitoring or early intervention
during intercurrent illness.1181 Children and adults who have sustained AKI and/or AKD are
at risk of recurrence. Educational efforts should include recognition of early warning signs,
appropriate fluid and medication management during illness, and guidance on when to seek
medical attention. Structured education addressing kidney health can empower patients and
families to actively participate in resolution of AKI and long-term self-care. Tailoring this
educational content to developmental stage, health literacy, and local context enhances
engagement and may reduce disparities in outcomes following AKI.
People require ongoing education about their kidney health including the rationale for
eGFR and UACR monitoring as well as best practices for kidney care including diet and
lifestyle recommendations.1207 Different online resources exist but it is important to tailor
them to the patient population and healthcare setting. An example is
https://www.thinkkidneys.nhs.uk/aki/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2016/07/Infographic-posterMarch-2017.pdf

R

Support to optimize medication management (Section 7.3) includes avoidance of
NSAIDs and minimization of other nephrotoxic drugs, unless the benefits outweigh risks and
there is no alternative. Recognizing the association between AKI and frailty, interventions to
improve muscle mass/strength may be beneficial to enhance functional outcomes and warrant
further evaluation.1215-1218

D

Kidney health protection strategies should include communication about possible
causes of AKI, how to maintain fluid balance during an acute illness, and when to seek
medical attention. Guidance on supporting medication management for adults during an
episode of acute illness requires an individualized risk assessment, considering a person’s
capacity to self-manage.1219-1221 Recommendations and practice points related to temporarily
withholding specific classes of drugs in the setting of acute illnesses that predispose to
hypovolemia or hypotension (SDMG) are provided in Chapter 4 (Section 4.11) and also
apply in the period following an episode of AKI or AKI. Patient self-management strategies
for SDMG should be provided in conjunction with support from healthcare professionals 684,
1219 and reinforced during hospital discharge, follow-up visits, and transitions in care.
Given the association between AKI and long-term physical and cognitive impairment,
educational interventions should also address rehabilitation strategies, including promotion of
physical activity and nutritional support to preserve muscle mass and support
neurodevelopmental recovery. Pediatric AKI education programs should center the child and
family, with kidney health advocacy integrated into broader child health and noncommunicable disease initiatives.1222
330

Recommendation 6.1.2: We suggest risk stratification of AKI survivors at hospital
discharge using a validated tool to identify children and adults at high risk of CKD who
may benefit from nephrology care after AKI (2D).
This recommendation and related practice point place a high value on assessing a person’s
risk of severe CKD to determine the most appropriate form of follow-up care following
AKI/AKD, recognizing a need to ensure children and adults are seen by the appropriate
clinical professionals, in the right setting and at the right time according to their physical,
psychological, and social needs and preferences. The recommendation aims to optimize
resource allocation and minimize treatment burden, particularly in terms of who is likely to
benefit most from nephrology care following hospital discharge after AKI/AKD.

R

AF
T

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
A Canadian trial randomized adults with a history of Stage 2–3 AKI to receive a riskstratified intervention guided by a validated risk index to predict risk of severe CKD versus
usual post-discharge care (Supplementary Table S94).1223 In the risk stratified group, highrisk participants received follow-up with a nephrologist and low-risk participants were
followed up by primary care physicians with recommendations provided. The trial found that
this strategy increased nephrology follow-up for those participants with sustained eGFR<30
ml/min per 1.73 m2 (RR: 3.17; 95% CI: 1.45–6.95).1223 There was also greater use of RASi
and statins when clinically indicated in the group at high risk of severe CKD among those
who received the risk-stratified follow-up intervention, but without evidence of differences in
development of CKD G5, need for long-term dialysis, or mortality (Supplementary Table
S92).1224 When using a composite processes of care outcome consisting of nephrology
follow-up among people with CKD at 90 days post hospital discharge and adherence to the
management recommendations for ACEi/ARBs and statins, risk-based follow-up was
associated with significantly better care delivery (RR: 9.34; 95% CI: 2.58–43.62).1223

D

There are a number of ongoing RCTs in progress in North America evaluating the
clinical effectiveness of interventions to improve follow-up care after AKI.1123, 1205, 1225
Certainty of evidence
There is very low certainty of evidence, based on a single small study, that use of riskstratification to guide care improves some measures of quality of care (i.e., RASi and statin
use, nephrology follow-up) among adult survivors of AKI at high risk of severe CKD, but no
effect has been demonstrated on individual prioritized kidney-related clinical outcomes in
adults.1223 The certainty of evidence was downgraded for sparseness, imprecision, and
methodological limitations (lack of blinding).

331

Values and preferences
There is broad agreement that follow-up care after AKI/AKD should be
multiprofessional, with kidney health protection plans developed prior to hospital discharge
and tailored to people’s overall care needs. This recommendation places a high value on
optimizing care for AKI survivors with or at risk of CKD. Targeted follow-up for people at
higher risk of CKD following AKI makes efficient use of both nephrologist and primary care,
providing evidence-based therapies aimed at reducing kidney disease progression and
cardiovascular consequences, such as use of RASi, statins, and SGLT2i.1165, 1226 This
approach also aims to minimize the burden of follow-up (i.e., anxiety, financial, employment,
time) for low-risk patients and their caregivers.

AF
T

Resource use and costs
There is insufficient capacity within the global nephrology workforces to see all AKI
survivors, with a need to largely place AKI in the context of enhancing comprehensive,
person-centered generalist care. A risk-stratified approach to follow-up, intensifying resource
use for those at highest risk of CKD, can optimize nephrology resource allocation and help
ensure people receive care from the appropriate team, in the right setting, and at the right time
without overburdening low-risk patients.

D

R

Considerations for implementation
Identification of people with AKI/AKD who benefit most from follow-up care after
hospital discharge remains challenging in clinical practice. A validation study of risk models
demonstrated that greater net benefit was achieved when follow-up decisions were based on a
risk prediction model for severe CKD after AKI rather than strategies based only on AKI
severity or kidney function at discharge.1227 In future, integration of risk calculation tools into
routine hospital workflows may facilitate uptake but needs to be linked with proper training
and support for healthcare professionals to interpret risk scores and determine appropriate
follow-up care pathways. Resource allocation, such as ensuring timely access to nephrology
services for high-risk people, is also needed to facilitate timely care.
Risk models that accurately estimate the probability of severe CKD following AKI
are available to identify survivors of AKI who may benefit from nephrology care. James et
al. derived and externally validated a predictive model for advanced CKD (G4 or G5) after an
episode of AKI.1228 (Figure 21) The 6-variable model (including age, gender, baseline SCr,
albuminuria, AKI severity, and SCr at hospital discharge as predictors) was well calibrated
and achieved a C-statistic of 0.81 (95% CI: 0.75–0.86) in the validation cohort. 1228

332

AF
T

Figure 21 | 6-variable risk score to predict transition to severe CKD (G4 or G5) for
adults after hospitalization with AKI.1228 AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidney
disease
Clear communication strategies with patients about their risk status and the
importance of follow-up care are important. Ongoing monitoring of a risk model’s
performance and adherence to follow-up protocols can help refine processes, ensuring that
people most likely to benefit from nephrology care receive appropriate support.

D

R

Rationale
There is a significant gap between the need for nephrology care and the available
global nephrology workforce.1229 Given the high global incidence of AKI, it is not feasible
for every AKI survivor to receive AKI care from a nephrologist, therefore identification of
people most likely to benefit from nephrology care optimizes the use of these limited
resources. Fewer than 5% of adults with AKI see a nephrologist after hospital discharge,
including <30% of those who subsequently develop CKD within a year after
hospitalization.1230 Nephrology follow-up after pediatric AKI is also infrequent, even among
those with severe AKI, despite known risks for CKD and hypertension.1176, 1231
Many of the recommendations for follow-up of AKI survivors can be effectively
provided by non-nephrology healthcare teams, including primary care in collaboration with
allied healthcare professionals (pharmacists, nurses, dieticians, social workers, socialprescribing teams, community health workers). However, it is likely that some people may
specifically benefit from nephrology care, particularly those at high risk for major adverse
kidney outcomes (e.g., de novo CKD or CKD progression). Aligning use of nephrology
services to a person’s risk of developing severe CKD has the potential to reduce treatment
burden for low-risk patients and better optimize nephrology follow-up care for those with
greatest need. Reducing the intensity of follow-up for low-risk patients acknowledges that not

333

all people develop CKD and that adults may encounter barriers to follow-up care, including
hospitalization related-fatigue, a reluctance to see more doctors, and long travel times.1167, 1169
Most patients receive follow-up with other physicians, indicating opportunities for
knowledge translation and surveillance to be integrated into subspecialty care or general
medical clinics for people at low risk of severe CKD. Given that nearly all AKI survivors
engage with the healthcare system post discharge, targeted knowledge translation and
implementation of pragmatic follow-up strategies, especially for non-nephrologists, are
essential to ensure appropriate long-term kidney monitoring and intervention.

AF
T

6.2. Medication management following AKI and/or AKD
Recommendation 6.2.1: We recommend starting or resuming RASi in adults, unless
there is a contraindication, in accordance with evidence-based guideline indications
(adults: 1B; children: 1D).
This recommendation places a high value on the benefits of evidence-based therapies to treat
diabetes, cardiovascular disease (including heart failure), and CKD; all of which are
common comorbidities in children and adults with AKI and may also contribute to the
development of AKI. Observational studies report better survival among adults resuming or
starting these medications after an episode of AKI and/or AKD. This recommendation aligns
with the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of
CKD (Sections 3.6) for specific recommendations and practice points in relation to RASi. 1164
Although there is very little evidence in children, the Work Group felt this recommendation
would also apply to children.

D

R

Key information
Balance of benefits and harms
The effectiveness of RASi treatment as a strategy to prevent adverse outcomes after
AKI/AKD has not been evaluated in randomized trials; however observational studies have
reported lower mortality among people who resumed these medications than those who did
not following a hospitalization with AKI. Some observational studies have shown that
treatment with RASi may increase the risk of hyperkalemia and readmission for AKI. In a
randomized trial from Canada where more patients in the intervention arm received RASi
after a hospitalization with AKI, there was a higher rate of hyperkalemia in the intervention
arm, suggesting that close laboratory monitoring is required for safety.
An evidence review of 8 studies including 81,869 adults demonstrated that reinitiation
of ACEi or ARBs after AKI was associated with a significantly lower mortality (HR: 0.83;
95% CI:0.75–0.91) and MACE (HR: 0.88; 95% CI: 0.85–0.92) without increasing the risk of
recurrent AKI or MAKE (Supplementary Table S95).1187, 1188, 1232-1237 Across 5 studies
including 31,970 adults, newly starting ACEi or ARBs after AKI was also associated with
significantly lower mortality (HR: 0.87; 95% CI: 0.81–0.95; Supplementary Table S96).1165,
1233, 1235-1237

334

A multicenter retrospective cohort analysis from Taiwan evaluated the timing of
RASi reinitiation after an AKI episode and observed that earlier reinitiation of these
medications in adults within 3 months of discharge was associated with a lower hazard for
mortality, cardiovascular events, and kidney failure, without an increased risk of severe
hyperkalemia.1238 The benefit of resuming these therapies was also seen among adult
participants with an eGFR <30 ml/min per 1.73 m2 where earlier initiation was associated
with a lower risk of dialysis or kidney failure. Other observational studies have reported
lowest mortality when RASi was started in the initial month after AKI among adults with
diabetes and proteinuria, regardless of whether the medication was started before or after
resolution of AKI.1014

AF
T

Certainty of evidence
There is moderate certainty of evidence that reinitiation of ACEi or ARBs after an
episode of AKI reduces the likelihood of death and MACE, with no evidence of effects on
likelihood of recurrent AKI, other AKI-related conditions, or poor control of underlying
conditions other than MACE in adults. The certainty of evidence was downgraded for
methodological quality of nonrandomized studies.1187, 1188, 1232-1237
There is moderate certainty of evidence that newly starting ACEi or ARBs after an
episode of AKI reduces the likelihood of death, with low to moderate certainty of evidence of
no evidence of effects on likelihood of AKI-related conditions in adults. Studies did not
report on outcomes related to poor control of underlying conditions. The certainty of
evidence was downgraded for methodological quality of nonrandomized studies and
imprecisions of some AKI-related outcomes.1165, 1233, 1235-1237

D

R

Values and preferences
This recommendation places a high value on preventing future adverse health
outcomes in AKI/AKD survivors. Diabetes, cardiovascular disease, heart failure, and CKD
are common comorbidities in people who experience AKI and may contribute to recurrent
AKI; ensuring that these conditions are effectively managed after an AKI episode is a key
priority and is associated with better health outcomes.
Resource use and costs
Starting or restarting these therapies may involve short-term costs for people with
respect to medication prescription and monitoring. However, this must be measured against
long-term costs to patients and healthcare systems related to rehospitalization, cardiovascular
morbidity and kidney events that may be potentially avoided.
Considerations for implementation
We recognize that care gaps exist in the treatment of chronic health conditions
associated with AKI in adults and in particular in children. Further, the availability of
healthcare professionals to recognize care gaps and address them is challenging in many parts
of the world. Where possible, medication review and reconciliation should be integrated into
routine follow-up care for people with AKI/AKD. Healthcare professional education is
335

required to inform medication prescribers of the risks and benefits of starting or restarting
RASi, and how to use them safely.
Rationale
Conditions benefiting from the use of RASi are prevalent in children and adults with a
history of AKI/AKD. RASi are frequently stopped during an AKI event because of their
effects on kidney hemodynamics and GFR, their association with hypotension, and the risk of
hyperkalemia. In many patients, these drugs are not restarted after hospital discharge, despite
clinal indications to do so, which is a potential gap in care.1162, 1213

AF
T

Numerous retrospective cohort studies have evaluated the associations between ACEi
or ARBs and clinical outcomes of people with AKI/AKD.1239 A systematic review and metaanalysis of 7 retrospective cohort studies in adults reported lower all-cause mortality among
ACEi or ARB users, including those who newly started or continued use after an AKI
episode (OR: 0.37; 95% CI: 0.42 to 0.32) as well as an increased risk of hyperkalemia,
however, there is an absence of evidence from RCTs on the effect of RASi initiation or
reinitiation on other important clinical outcomes after an episode of AKI. Further, there is an
absence of RCTs in children.
Practice Point 6.2.1: Evaluate the clinical indication for starting or resuming sodiumglucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors (SGLT2i), glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists
(GLP-1 RA) and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists (MRA) in children and adults.

D

R

SGLT2i are indicated for use in children and adults with type 2 diabetes (T2D), CKD,
and heart failure; all are common conditions among people who experience AKI. GLP-1 RAs
also have been shown to have important effects on clinical outcomes in adults with T2D and
CKD. These medications are frequently stopped during an episode of AKI due to a concern
that they may exacerbate AKI due to their diuretic effects (SGLT2i) or gastrointestinal effects
on oral intake (GLP-1 RA). Large retrospective cohort studies from Taiwan reported better
outcomes with the use of SGLT2i and GLP-1 RA in people with diabetes and AKD.1240 1241
These studies report a lower risk of all-cause mortality, major adverse kidney outcomes, and
major adverse cardiac outcomes among people with clinical indications for restarting
treatment.
MRAs are also commonly prescribed in populations at risk for AKI and are frequently
stopped due to their association with hyperkalemia. Less is known about restarting MRA
after an AKI event; however, given the range of demonstrated benefits over these disease
states, cautious reinitiation of these medications after AKI in those with a clinical indication
for treatment, no contraindications, stable kidney function, and an eGFR >25 ml/min per 1.73
m2 should be considered.

336

Practice Point 6.2.2: Assess the appropriateness of starting or resuming guidelineindicated medications at hospital discharge and by 3 months after AKI/AKD.
The optimal timing to restart medications after AKI/AKD is unknown. Reinitiation of
medications should be considered in the overall context of the person and individualized
based on comorbidities, resolution of acute illness, clinical assessment, and kidney
function.574 Diuretics and antihypertensive medications should be restarted when clinically
indicated. Persistent electrolyte abnormalities or non-recovery of kidney function may
preclude starting or restarting medications known to affect electrolyte balance, particularly
those that affect serum potassium levels (i.e., MRA, RASi). If indicated, these medications
should be restarted when kidney function and electrolyte balance stabilize, with a plan for
frequent monitoring.

AF
T

Practice Point 6.2.3: Monitor RASi, MRA, or diuretic prescription and management
following AKI/AKD in accordance with the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline
for the Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney Disease.
The Work Group agrees with recommendations and selected practice points from the
KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD for the
treatment of CKD with RASi, SGLT2i, GLP-1 RA, and MRA.1164 This guideline provides
specific information about drug dosing and monitoring of potassium and kidney function,
after treatment initiation that apply to resumption following an episode of AKI/AKD.

R

6.3 Evaluation for CKD
Practice Point 6.3.1: Assess kidney function and markers of kidney damage 3 months
after AKI or AKD to evaluate for resolution, and new onset or worsening of preexisting
CKD.

D

Episodes of AKI and/or AKD are predictors for new or progressive CKD and kidney
failure in children and adults, therefore assessments of both kidney function (SCr or cystatin
C, eGFR, electrolytes) and kidney damage (UACR or urinary protein-to-creatinine ratio
[UPCR]) 3 months after an AKI/AKD episode are important.54, 57, 192 Furthermore, both
reduced eGFR and albuminuria at 3 months are associated with subsequent progression of
kidney disease.57, 207, 528, 1150, 1242
Recognizing that AKI, AKD, and CKD are related entities, monitoring for the
development and progression of CKD is essential to improve kidney care and outcomes
across this continuum of health states (Figure 22).59, 528 Children and adults identified with
CKD following AKI or AKD should be managed as detailed in the KDIGO 2024 Clinical
Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD.1164 Children and adults
without CKD at 3 months remain at increased risk for new onset CKD and should also be
managed according to the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and
Management of CKD (Practice Point 1.1.1.1). Determining if, when, and how to initiate;
restart; and uptitrate medication of clinical prognostic benefit for people with or at risk of
337

AF
T

CKD after an episode of AKI and/or AKD requires careful consideration, with assessment of
eGFR, UACR, and electrolytes.

Figure 22 | Proposed conceptual model for the continuum of AKD, CKD, and AKI. 59
AKD, acute kidney disease; AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidney disease
Practice Point 6.3.2: Serum cystatin C-based GFR estimation can be used to assess for
CKD in children and adults after AKI in clinical situations where SCr is less accurate.

R

Muscle wasting is a common complication of prolonged hospitalization and is
particularly prevalent in critical illness as well as other conditions commonly seen in people
with AKI including cancer, malnutrition, heart failure, and cirrhosis.1243 Cystatin C may be
more accurate for estimating GFR than SCr among people who have had prolonged or critical
illness and/or experienced significant weight loss or sarcopenia. The Work Group also refers
to recommendations and selected practice points from the KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice
Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of CKD for the use of eGFRcr-cys.1164

D

In the context of hospitalized AKI, the use of SCr as a measure of kidney function and
resolution of AKI may be confounded by reduction in muscle mass and changes in creatinine
generation. This may result in an overestimation of kidney recovery in people with
AKI/AKD.20, 1017, 1243-1248 Cystatin C is independent of muscle mass and may be a better
marker of kidney function in these people.
A prospective single center study of critically ill patients in the UK sequentially
assessed kidney function using cystatin C, SCr, and measured GFR using iohexol, and found
that eGFR by SCr systematically overestimated kidney function.13 The AKI Risk in Derby
(ARID) cohort study in the UK also demonstrated large discrepancies between eGFR based
on cystatin C and eGFR based on SCr in a general hospitalized population at 3 months
following discharge, with the magnitude in difference being more prominent in people
affected by AKI.1249

338

6.4 Post-discharge care for children and adults receiving RRT following AKI in the
outpatient setting
Practice Point 6.4.1: RRT programs should incorporate comprehensive dialysis care
and communication plans for children and adults receiving RRT following AKI tailored
to their likelihood of dialysis liberation.

AF
T

Up to 30% of adults who receive RRT for AKI and survive to hospital discharge will
remain dialysis dependent at discharge, and of these, approximately half will be able to
discontinue dialysis within 90 days.1250 People who need ongoing RRT after hospitalization
with AKI/AKD report inconsistent care in outpatient dialysis facilities where their care is
frequently not distinguished from those receiving long-term dialysis for kidney failure.
However, care goals for people receiving RRT after AKI often differ significantly from those
receiving maintenance dialysis for chronic kidney failure, as recovery of kidney function is a
desired outcome.
A specialized approach to care for people receiving short-term RRT in the outpatient
setting may benefit patients, healthcare professionals, and healthcare systems. Patients may
benefit from avoiding unnecessary harm of prolonged, unnecessary RRT if recovery of
kidney function is identified. Those with a greater probability of resolution may benefit from
additional monitoring procedures to identify recovery of kidney function and avoid
prolonged, unnecessary RRT. Identification of people with a low likelihood of resolution may
assist them, their caregivers, healthcare professionals, and healthcare systems in care
planning discussions for long-term RRT and aid planning and resource allocation within
dialysis units.

D

R

Prehospitalization kidney function is a strong predictor of dialysis independence;
however, up to 30% of patients with baseline CKD G4 may also achieve dialysis
independence post discharge.812, 1251 Some predictive models have been published to better
stratify the likelihood of discontinuing dialysis in adults following AKI.1252
Lee et al. developed and validated a prediction model for kidney recovery after AKI
in a cohort of 2214 adults who started dialysis in hospital.1252 Four factors were identified
through stepwise regression as independent predictors of dialysis liberation: preadmission
eGFR, preadmission hemoglobin, history of chronic liver disease, and age. This model
excluded people with a >20% risk of inpatient mortality, only included preadmission and
intra-admission variables, and did not account for the competing risk of death. It was also not
externally validated and had relatively modest discrimination (C-index: 0.64).
Clark et al. developed and externally validated a predictive score for kidney recovery
and death in patients continuing dialysis as outpatients after starting in hospital using a
population based cohort of 7657 patient in Ontario Canada.1253 Predictive variables identified
in this analysis included comorbidities, days from admission to dialysis, days from first
dialysis to discharge, ICU status, prehospital admission eGFR, and random UACR. While the
ability of this tool to discriminate was modest (C-statistic: 0.7; 95% CI: 0.67–0.73 and 0.66;
339

95% CI: 0.62–0.69 for the outcomes of recovery and death, respectively), the risk groups
identified in the study did allow a degree of prognostic separation that may be clinically
useful.
Practice Point 6.4.2: Engage patients, caregivers, and outpatient dialysis care teams in
the development of a post-discharge care plan prior to transition from the hospital to
community settings.

AF
T

Practice Point 6.4.3: Dialysis care for children and adults receiving RRT following AKI
requires clinical assessment of volume status, laboratory evaluation for evidence of
kidney recovery, medication review and reconciliation, and patient education about
identification of return of kidney function and minimizing kidney injury during the
resolution phase.
Practice Point 6.4.4: Provide education and engage adults, children, and caregivers in
shared decision-making focused around self-care, short- and long-term risks of
permanent RRT and mortality, quality of life, and goals of care to inform decisions
around dialysis care.

D

R

Transition to outpatient RRT requires timely transmission of discharge summaries,
medication review and reconciliation, and recognition of potential for kidney function
recovery to inform an appropriate monitoring plans. A post-discharge plan should engage
patients, caregivers, and dialysis care professionals with clear roles and responsibilities
(Table 59). Patient and caregiver education should be developmentally appropriate, culturally
sensitive, and include individualized discussions on expectations for resolution, long-term
risks, and care preferences.

340

PCP

D
R

341

Other team
members

Review labs if shared;
monitor recovery
during transitions

—

Track recovery
trajectory and
symptom changes

—

Support medication
adjustments during
transitions

Pharmacist: adjust
meds
Dietitian: reinforce
dietary advice

Follow-up UO in
outpatient settings

—

Reinforce adherence
to follow-up labs

Lab: ensure timely
and accurate
processing

Coordinate care postdischarge; ensure
continuity

Dialysis techs:
support prelab draws

Assess general wellbeing and symptom
burden

Social work: screen
for barriers to
reporting symptoms

Review home
BP/weight and refer
back if concerns arise

Dietitian: counsel on
sodium and fluid
restrictions

Avoid relying solely
on eGFR for
medication dosing

—

AF
T

Table 59 | AKI receiving RRT follow-up multidisciplinary monitoring tasks
Assessment
Patient/family task
Nurse
Nephrologist
parameter
Understand importance
Interpret SCr trends;
Serum creatinine
Draw labs predialysis,
of lab trends; ask about
determine recovery or
(SCr)
monitor trends
recovery signs
weaning potential
Understand BUN as a
Ensure predialysis
Use BUN alongside
Blood urea nitrogen marker of nitrogenous
BUN drawn and
clinical context to
(BUN)
waste levels; ask if safe
reported
guide decisions
to try off dialysis
Triage abnormal
Adhere to
Adjust medications
Electrolytes
electrolyte results;
potassium/bicarbonateand dialysis based on
(K⁺, HCO₃⁻)
reinforce dietary
related diet and meds
electrolyte trends
adherence
Teach patient UO
Record daily urine
Interpret UO and
Urine output (UO)
monitoring; verify
output at home
consider diuretic use
reports
Assist with accurate
Instruct patient on
Order urine
Urine collection for
24-hour urine
proper urine
collections for
creatinine clearance
collection, if feasible
collection method
creatinine clearance
Ensure consistent
Keep dialysis sessions
Evaluate solute
Interdialytic solute
predialysis lab
consistent; ask about
clearance and
rise
checks; report to
recovery
consider dialysis taper
doctor
Report fatigue, nausea,
Synthesize symptoms
Screen for symptoms;
Symptoms of uremia appetite changes, or
with labs to assess
escalate concerns
confusion
clearance adequacy
Measure and record
Determine fluid status
Track weight, swelling, weights and BP;
Fluid tolerance
and adjust
and BP at home
report signs of
ultrafiltration goals
overload
Estimated
Ask about what eGFR
Reinforce that eGFR
Explain limitations of
glomerular filtration means and if it's
is not fully reliable
eGFR; consider
rate
reliable during AKI
alone in AKI
multiple data points
(eGFR)
resolution

D
R

AF
T

(Caution!)
AKI, acute kidney injury; BP, blood pressure; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; PCP, primary care physician; RRT, renal replacement therapy

342

Structured clinical evaluation should include assessment of volume status, BP, and
medication review as well as assessment of dialysis adequacy and kidney recovery.
Assessment of kidney function should occur at regular intervals, at least weekly during the
first month. The WATCH-ME framework incorporates many of these elements (Table 60).791,
1210

AF
T

Intradialytic hypotension and hemodynamic instability may delay or impair recovery
of kidney function in people with AKI.1254 There is no specific BP target for people with AKI
receiving dialysis, however it may be reasonable to tolerate a slightly higher BP when there is
potential for resolution to minimize the risk of renal hypoperfusion. Similarly, volume
management should aim to minimize the risk of hypovolemia, intradialytic hypotension, and
organ hypoperfusion, while avoiding symptomatic volume overload. Outpatients receiving
RRT following AKI may experience dynamic changes in lean body mass and volume due to
prolonged illness, recovery from illness, and changing kidney function, which can
additionally affect dietary intake. Assessment of BP and volume (including weight) is
required with each dialysis treatment. Diuretics may be helpful in managing volume and are
associated with less risk of intradialytic hypotension. 761, 1255

D

R

Medication review and management is recommended for all people transitioning to
the outpatient dialysis setting following AKI. Patients and caregivers should be instructed and
educated to avoid nephrotoxin exposures and be provided sick day guidance. Pharmacistassisted medication management may reduce the risk of nephrotoxin exposure and lower
rates of rehospitalization in AKI survivors.1171, 1256 The optimal timing for initiating or
resuming cardio- and renoprotective medications (e.g., ACEi, statins, SGLT2i) in adults with
AKI who are still receiving RRT post hospitalization is unclear.

343

Table 60 |.Post-discharge care guide for AKI-RRT patients incorporating WATCH-ME framework
Care domain
Considerations
Recommended actions
Monitoring and follow-up
(WATCH-ME)

Access for
dialysis (A)

• Central venous catheter
(CVC) care
• Future access planning

Teaching (T)

• Patient and caregiver
understanding of AKI and
dialysis process
• Family education for
children with AKI on RRT
• Transition
Monitoring kidney function
recovery potential

Regular weight checks; adjust
target weight based on clinical
assessment

Educate on CVC care; promote
vein preservation; discuss
arteriovenous access creation or
other treatment options for kidney
failure if dialysis dependency
continues

Monitor for signs of infection;
plan for timely transition to
permanent access and selection
of long-term treatment modality
if needed

Reduces infection risk
and prepares for potential
long-term dialysis needs

Provide tailored education on
AKI, dialysis procedures,
medication management, and
lifestyle modifications

Assess comprehension regularly;
reinforce education during
follow-up visits

Empowers patients and
caregivers, enhancing
adherence and
engagement

Regularly assess SCr, BUN, and
UO; adjust dialysis frequency and
duration accordingly

Trend lab values over time;
consider 24-hour urine
collections for creatinine
clearance, monitor urine volume
at home

Facilitates timely
recognition of kidney
recovery and appropriate
dialysis adjustments

Monitor BP pre-, intra-, and
post-dialysis; review home BP
logs, avoid intradialytic
hypotension

Prevents renal
hypoperfusion,
supporting resolution and
reducing cardiovascular
risks

Regular medication reviews;
coordinate with pharmacists and
primary care physicians

Minimizes further kidney
injury and optimizes
therapeutic efficacy

D
R

Clearance
assessment (C)

Educate on concept of dry weight;
optimize diuretic regimens; allow
permissive hypervolemia to
prevent intradialytic hypotension

AF
T

• Dry weight may fluctuate
• Volume status is dynamic

Weight
assessment (W)

Hypotension
management (H)

Avoidance of intradialytic
and postural hypotension

Medication
management
(M)

Avoidance of nephrotoxic
agents; appropriate dosing

Rationale/Notes

Set conservative ultrafiltration
goals; educate on symptoms of
hypotension; adjust
antihypertensive medications as
needed
Review and reconcile
medications; discontinue or adjust
nephrotoxic drugs; ensure
appropriate dosing for kidney
function
344

Prevents intradialytic
hypotension and supports
hemodynamic stability

Conduct comprehensive reviews
Addresses holistic health
Schedule multidisciplinary
including cardiovascular status,
needs, promoting overall
Evaluation (E)
follow-ups; utilize standardized
nutritional assessment, and
resolution and quality of
assessment tools
psychosocial well-being
life
AKI, acute kidney injury; BP, blood pressure; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CVC, central venous catheter; RRT, renal replacement therapy; SCr, serum
creatinine; UO, urine output

D
R

AF
T

Ongoing assessment of
overall health and comorbid
conditions

345

The criteria for and processes by which dialysis may be discontinued for people
following AKI is covered in Chapter 5 and has not been specifically studied for people with
AKI receiving outpatient dialysis. Most people with AKI who successfully discontinue
dialysis in the outpatient setting will have or will be at risk for CKD. Patients should be
educated about this risk, as well as the risk of recurrent AKI, and general aspects of kidney
care, as outlined in Section 6.1.
Practice Point 6.4.5: Upon discontinuation of outpatient dialysis, a nephrologist should
conduct a comprehensive assessment within 7 days, followed by an additional
evaluation of kidney function at 90 days.

AF
T

Discontinuation of dialysis represents another transition in the care and period of
vulnerability for people with AKI who have been treated with RRT. Patients should be
assessed by a nephrologist with the timing and frequency of follow-up determined by the
person’s clinical status at the time of dialysis discontinuation. While assessment should occur
at a minimum of 7 days after dialysis discontinuation, volume and electrolyte disturbances
may require closer and more frequent assessment. All recovering patients, regardless of the
degree of resolution should have an assessment of kidney function at 90 days to assess for the
presence of de novo or progressive CKD.

R

The majority of adults receiving RRT for AKI will recover sufficiently to discontinue
dialysis within 90 days. People still requiring dialysis after this period of time should be
reassessed with respect to prognosis. The goals of care should be discussed and agreed with
the patient and caregiver, and additional patient education should be provided to inform their
transition to long-term dialysis for kidney failure.

D

6.5. Considerations specific to children
6.5.1 Planning follow-up care for children after AKI and/or AKD
Practice Point 6.5.1.1: Assess children following AKI for global functional status at
hospital discharge and for growth parameters and functional status at outpatient
follow-up.
The sequelae of AKI in children can include growth restriction, functional decline,
neurodevelopmental impairment, and reduced health-related quality of life,1086, 1087, 1257-1259 in
addition to hypertension and CKD. These outcomes reinforce the importance of assessments
of growth parameters and functional metrics in post-AKI care of children, in addition to BP
and laboratory monitoring. Post-AKI care in children requires careful interpretation of kidney
function changes in the context of hemodynamic alterations. Rises in serum creatinine after
initiation of RASi can reflect hemodynamic changes rather than intrinsic kidney injury and
should not prompt medication discontinuation. As in adult patients, kidney function testing in
children should be performed with close attention to the clinical picture and volume status.

346

Follow-up plans for children after AKI may vary by age, AKI severity, duration,
degree of resolution, and comorbid risk (Table 61). High-risk infants, such as those with
Stage 2–3 AKI, persistent AKI (>48 hours), or residual proteinuria, require comprehensive
lab evaluation, BP monitoring, and growth tracking, beginning within 3 months postdischarge. Adolescents with AKI should also receive counseling on NSAID avoidance,
lifestyle risks, and reproductive health, ideally as part of transition planning. Growth
parameters, including head circumference in infants, should be systematically incorporated
into post-AKI follow-up given that AKI in infancy and early childhood is associated with
impaired growth. Colocation of AKI follow-up assessment with other subspecialty clinics
may reduce caregiver burden.

D

R

AF
T

In the largest multicenter cohort to date evaluating functional outcomes after children
receiving CRRT for AKI or fluid overload, functional decline was common and often
persisted beyond hospital discharge.1257 Discharge Functional Status Scale (FSS) scores were
the most robust predictor of long-term outcome, highlighting the need for early, proximal
assessments to trigger intervention. These findings support incorporating functional
assessment tools such as the FSS, and Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory (PedsQL) into
discharge planning and post-AKI surveillance. Children with elevated FSS at discharge,
particularly those with sepsis, may benefit from early referral to developmental and
rehabilitation services. Pediatric AKI follow-up should encompass targeted functional
support and neurodevelopmental interventions, especially for high-risk populations such as
preterm infants, those requiring CRRT, and survivors of septic shock.

347

Table 61 |.Pediatric AKI/AKD follow-up elements stratified by age group and risk category, modified from the NICU Survivor Delphi process 288
Age group
Risk stratification
Follow-up interval
Laboratory monitoring Other monitoring
(AKI stage, duration,
resolution)
SCr, UA

BP, growth tracking

1, 3, and 12 months

SCr, cystatin C,
electrolytes, UA,
UACR/UPCR

BP, growth tracking, kidney and
bladder ultrasound if structural
concern

1–3 months

SCr, UA

BP, growth tracking

1, 3 and 12 months

SCr, cystatin C,
electrolytes, UA,
UACR/UPCR

BP, growth tracking, kidney and
bladder ultrasound if structural
concern, kidney health education,
sick day guidance and kidney care
for families and children

1–3 months

SCr, UA

BP, growth tracking

High

1, 3, and 12 months

SCr, cystatin C,
electrolytes UA,
UACR/UPCR

BP, growth tracking, GFR
estimation, AKI/CKD education,
signs of HTN/CKD

Low

1–3 months

SCr, UA

BP, discuss long-term risk,
self-monitoring education

Infants (<1 yr)
High

Low
Toddlers (1–3 yrs)
High

D
R

Low

1–3 months

AF
T

Low

School-age (4–12 yrs)

Adolescents (13–18 yrs)

348

High

1, 3, and 12 months

SCr, cystatin C,
electrolytes, UA,
UACR/UPCR, GFR

BP, proteinuria trends, education on
NSAIDs, other nephrotoxins, and
CKD risk, reproductive counseling,
transition planning

D
R

AF
T

Low risk: Stage 1 AKI, resolved <48h, normal urinalysis (UA) & serum creatinine (SCr) at discharge from hospital; High: Stage 2–3 or AKI >48h,
proteinuria or residual elevation in creatinine or cystatin C discharge, infants born <28 weeks, critical cardiac disease, BP, blood pressure; CKD, chronic
kidney disease; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; HTN, hypertension; NICU, neonatal intensive care unit; NSAID, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug; PCP,
primary care physician; UA, urinalysis; UACR, urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio; UPCR, urine protein-to-creatinine ratio

349

Practice Point 6.5.1.2: In children previously taking RASi, these medications should be
resumed with resolution of AKI and/or AKD, unless there is a contraindication.

AF
T

The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that children and adolescents with
CKD, hypertension, and proteinuria should be treated with RASi.1260 According to the
KDIGO 2025 IgA Nephropathy and IgA Vasculitis Guideline, all children with IgA
nephropathy and proteinuria >200 mg/d or UPCR >200 mg/g (>20 mg/mmol) should receive
RAS blockade.1261 RASi are also commonly indicated for pediatric cardiovascular conditions;
the American Heart Association 2024 scientific statement on chronic heart failure in children
and adolescents with congenital heart disease notes that RASi may be considered in children
and adolescents with congenital heart disease and systemic left ventricular dysfunction,
particularly in the presence of hypertension.1262 In a 2024 randomized, double-blind trial of
375 children with heart failure due to systemic left ventricular systolic dysfunction,
sacubitril/valsartan did not differ significantly from enalapril at 52 weeks using a global rank
endpoint (Mann–Whitney probability 0.52; p=0.42), with both arms demonstrating
improvements in functional status and biomarkers and similar safety profiles.1263 Temporary
discontinuation of RASi during episodes of AKI and/or AKD in these pediatric populations
and others where the benefit from RASi may exist should not preclude resumption once
clinical stability is achieved. As in adults, careful clinical assessment and laboratory
monitoring are essential to ensure safe reintroduction and to avoid missed opportunities for
long-term organ protection.

R

6.5.2. Post-discharge care for children receiving RRT following AKI in the outpatient
setting
Practice Point 6.5.2.1: A risk-based approach guided by cause and severity of AKI and
kidney health assessments at hospital discharge and one year following an AKI episode
can be used to determine need for future nephrology follow-up in children.

D

A limited pediatric nephrology workforce and disparities in access to specialized care
can adversely impact the delivery of care for children following AKI. A tiered follow-up
framework informed by AKI severity and the context and cause of the AKI episode, with
nephrology referral and surveillance for children with Stage 2–3 AKI, delayed kidney
recovery, or predisposing conditions such as congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary
tract or other primary kidney diseases has been proposed.288 A prospective study showed that
children who demonstrate normal kidney function in the first year following an episode of
AKI were at low risk of developing CKD within the subsequent 2–4 years.1264 The risk of
CKD was lowest when preserved eGFR was combined with absence of proteinuria and
hypertension. These findings support a risk-based approach to post-AKI follow-up in which
children with a normal kidney health assessment at one year without complex comorbidities
or subsequent AKI episodes may be safely discharged from pediatric nephrology care,
allowing for more efficient allocation of resources and tailored long-term surveillance (Table
62)

350

Table 62 |.Sample risk assessment approach for pediatric AKI/AKD survivors, modified from the NICU Survivor Delphi process 288
Risk
AKI severity
Kidney status at Risk factors
Hospital course
Outcomes
Suggested followcategory
discharge
up
Low risk
Stage 1, duration
Normal SCr and
None or mild
No ICU admission,
Full resolution
Routine monitoring
<48 h
UA
comorbidities
short hospital stay, no
likely; low risk of
with pediatrician
RRT
CKD
Stage 2–3,
duration >48 h, or
RRT requirement

Residual
elevation in SCr
or cystatin C, or
proteinuria

• Infants born <28
weeks
• Critical cardiac
disease
• Non-kidney organ
transplant
• Cancer

• ICU admission
• Prolonged hospital
stay
• Mechanical
ventilation
• Exposure to
nephrotoxic
medication
• RRT use

Increased risk of
AKD, CKD, and
mortality

AF
T

High risk

Structured
nephrology followup, potentially
delayed discharge
from kidney clinic

Increased risk of
Longterm
• Glomerulonephritis
AKD CKD
nephrology follow• Tubular-interstitial
up
nephritis
• Vasculitides
• CAKUT
AKD, acute kidney disease; AKI, acute kidney injury; CAKUT, congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract; CKD, chronic kidney disease; ICU, intensive
care unit; RRT, renal replacement therapy; SCr, serum creatinine; UA, urinalysis
Primary kidney
disease

D
R

High risk

351

Practice Point 6.5.2.2: Children recovering from AKI treated with RRT require
individualized follow-up that includes age-appropriate functional and developmental
assessments, growth and neurodevelopmental surveillance, and integrated care across
nephrology, primary care, and relevant subspecialties.

AF
T

There is evidence of a rising incidence of pediatric AKI requiring RRT, with
population-based data from Canada showing an increase from 0.58 to 0.65 per 1,000 personyears between 1996 and 2015.1109 Over this period, there has been a notable shift in modality
use: the relative use of PD has declined, while both intermittent hemodialysis and CRRT
have increased.1109, 1218 These trends likely reflect both increased illness severity and broader
access to advanced extracorporeal technologies. Among survivors of AKI treated with RRT,
up to 70% exhibit subclinical evidence of kidney damage, such as proteinuria, hypertension,
and reduced eGFR after dialysis is discontinued.1017 This underscores the importance of
structured, longitudinal follow-up that includes regular assessment of BP and kidney
function.

R

The majority of children who survive after RRT for AKI, recover kidney function,
but rates vary by illness severity, modality, and underlying condition.1265 In an international,
multicenter cohort study of critically ill children treated with CRRT, 9.4% remained dialysisdependent at 90 days.1088 Resolution typically occurs within 2–6 weeks after AKI onset, but
delayed or incomplete resolution is more common in children with multisystem organ
dysfunction, preexisting CKD, onco-hematologic conditions, or significant nephrotoxin
exposure. The EurAKId registry, a prospective European cohort, found that 10%–30% of
children treated with RRT for AKI experienced delayed resolution or transitioned to dialysis
dependence, especially in high-risk subgroups.1038

D

Recovery of kidney function after RRT may also occur in the outpatient setting. A
retrospective analysis of the United States Renal Data System showed that resolution was
more frequent among younger children, females, non-White patients, and those initially
treated with hemodialysis.1266 Children with acute tubular necrosis had the highest resolution
rates (17.5%), reinforcing the importance of tailoring expectations and follow-up intensity
based on the underlying etiology of AKI. These data support cautious use of the kidney
failure label in children with potentially reversible causes of kidney injury, emphasizing the
need for vigilant surveillance of residual kidney function over time.
Optimal care for children recovering from AKI treated with RRT should include
comprehensive clinical and laboratory assessment of kidney recovery, regular medication
review and reconciliation with attention to nephrotoxic exposures, and patient and caregiver
education on recognizing signs of resolution or deterioration. Nutritional and fluid
management goals must account for growth and developmental changes, with dynamic
352

adjustments throughout resolution. Care models should facilitate coordination between
intensive care, pediatric nephrology, primary care, and rehabilitation services to address the
complex needs of these children. Given the limited pediatric nephrology workforce and
potential barriers to specialty care, centralized or telehealth-enabled follow-up could be
considered. Additionally, educating general pediatricians and relevant subspecialists on postAKI surveillance and criteria for nephrology referral can enhance the safety and continuity of
care during the vulnerable resolution phase.

D

R

AF
T

Pediatric survivors of AKI or early-onset CKD who progress to kidney failure in
childhood and adolescence experience enduring disruptions in social, emotional, and
functional domains during young adulthood. While many adapt to chronic illness, the
cumulative burden of kidney injury early in life, including developmental impacts, treatment
intensity, and transplant challenges, manifests in constrained life participation. Tracking
employment, independence, and health-related quality of life metrics into adulthood are also
essential aspects of pediatric AKI follow-up.1267

353

METHODS FOR GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT
Aim
The aim of this project was to update the KDIGO 2012 Clinical Practice Guideline
for Acute Kidney Injury.608 The guideline update development methods are described
below.

Overview of process

Appointing Work Group members and the Evidence Review Team (ERT)
Defining scope and the topics of interest for the guideline
Developing and refining topics for systematic evidence review
Developing and implementing literature search strategies
Selecting studies according to predefined eligibility criteria
Conducting data extraction and risk of bias assessment of the included studies
Conducting evidence syntheses and meta-analysis, where appropriate
Assessing the certainty of evidence for each outcome across studies, and assessing
the overall certainty of evidence across critical outcomes
Finalizing guideline recommendations, practice points, and supporting rationale
Grading the strength of recommendations, based on the overall certainty of
evidence and other considerations
Convening a public review of the guideline draft in March 2026
Amending the guideline based on the external review feedback and updated
systematic reviews
Finalizing and publishing the guideline

R

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

AF
T

These guidelines adhered to international best practices for guideline development
(Appendix B: Supplementary Tables S2, S3, and S4),1268, 1269 and have been reported in
accordance with the Institute of Medicine and Appraisal of Guidelines for Research and
Evaluation (AGREE) II reporting checklists.1270 The processes undertaken for the
development of the KDIGO 2026 Clinical Practice Guideline for Acute Kidney Injury
(AKI) and Acute Kidney Disease (AKD) are described below.

D

•
•
•
•
•

Commissioning of Work Group and ERT for the guideline update
For the guideline update, KDIGO and the Co-Chairs assembled and engaged a
Work Group with expertise in adult and pediatric nephrology, critical care medicine,
emergency medicine, general medicine, pharmacy and pharmacology, as well as people
with lived experience of AKI. The Brown University Center for Evidence Synthesis in
Health in Providence, Rhode Island which has expertise in nephrology, evidence synthesis,
and guideline development was contracted as the ERT and was tasked with conducting and
354

updating the systematic reviews. The ERT coordinated the methodological and analytical
processes of guideline development, including literature searching, data extraction, risk of
bias assessment, evidence synthesis and meta-analysis, grading the certainty of the
evidence for each critical and important outcome, and grading the overall certainty of the
evidence for the recommendations. KDIGO Methods Committee representatives also
ensured the guideline development process adhered to the KDIGO methods as outlined in
the KDIGO Methods Manual and provided guidance of guideline methodology throughout
the development of the guideline. The Work Group was responsible for defining the scope
of the guideline, writing the recommendations and the underlying supporting text, grading
the strength of the recommendations, and developing practice points.

R

AF
T

Defining scope and formulating key clinical questions
The KDIGO 2012 AKI Guideline was reviewed by the Co-Chairs to establish a
framework for the 2026 update. A complete Scope of Work encompassing both legacy
topics and newly identified clinical topics for inclusion in the update was revised and
finalized based on feedback from the Work Group and external review. Based on this list of
topics, the ERT suggested topics for systematic evidence review to inform the development
of evidence-based recommendations. In an iterative process, with additional discussion
with Work Group members, the list of systematic review topics was finalized, and study
eligibility criteria were determined based on the Population, Intervention, Comparator,
Outcomes, and Study design (PICOS) formulation. A shortlist of potential outcomes of
interest was derived from a 2019 National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases (NIDDK) workshop,1161 a core outcome set for multimorbidity research,1271 and
the ERT experience with kidney guidelines. Outcome prioritization was based on
consideration of the Standardized Outcomes in Nephrology (SONG) outcome sets
(https://songinitiative.org/); although SONG has not published an outcome set specific to
AKI.

D

Details of the PICOS questions are provided with prioritized outcomes noted in
Table 63. For all topics, relevant existing systematic reviews of eligible primary studies
were also identified. All evidence reviews were conducted in accordance with the Cochrane
Handbook,1272 the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality Evidence-based Practice
Center Program Methods Guide,1273 and guideline development adhered to the standards of
GRADE.1274

355

Table 63 | Clinical questions and systematic review topics in PICOS format
Comparator

Outcomesa

Study designb

● Alternative
thresholds, etc.
● Alternative
methods to
estimate baseline
SCr
● Exclude
o Comparison
with RIFLE or
AKIN criteria
(except
pediatric
RIFLE)
o Comparison of
AKI stages

● Death, all-cause
● Death, kidney-related
● AKI stages (incident),
including any stage
(≥Stage 1)
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● CKD G3-G5 (at ≥90 days)
● CKD G5D (dialysis) (at ≥90
days)

● Direct comparisons of
different thresholds/
definitions
● Categorical factors
(e.g., predictors)
● Diagnostic test analysis
(e.g., test accuracy)
● N≥1000

● Alternative
trajectory

● Death, all-cause
● Death, kidney-related
● AKI stages (incident),
including any stage
(≥Stage 1)
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● CKD G3-G5 (at ≥90 days)
● CKD G5D (dialysis) (at ≥90
days)
● ICU admission
● Hospital or ICU length of stay

● Direct comparisons of
different thresholds/
definitions
● Categorical factors
(e.g., predictors)
● Diagnostic test analysis
(e.g., test accuracy)
● N≥1000 adults or ≥500
non-infant children or
≥100 infants

D
R

AF
T

Research questions
Population
Intervention/ predictor
(RQ)
Chapter 1. AKI and AKD definition, identification, and classification
RQ 1: For patients being
● KDIGO AKI definition
• People at risk for AKI
evaluated for or with
(SCr, UO), full,
• People with established
established AKI, how do
components, and
AKI
different components of
combinations, including
• In-patient, having a
the KDIGO AKI
variants of these,
procedure, being
definition, and variants
including variant
evaluated for possible
thereof, compare in their
definitions of stages
AKI, or with AKI
association with AKI
● Methods to estimate
outcomes?
baseline SCr
● Exclude
o Evaluation of factors
as continuous
variables
o Evaluation of
measures other than
SCr or UO
RQ 2: What is the
● Hospital general or ICU
● Specified definitions of
association between AKI
population with
AKI or AKD trajectory
(<7 days) or AKD (7-90
established AKI or AKD,
o Transient AKI
days) trajectories and
defined by KDIGO,
o Persistent AKI
AKI and CKD (>90 days)
RIFLE, AKIN (or
o Progressive or
outcomes?
variants)
worsening AKI or
AKD
● Exclude
o Recurrent AKI
o Specific hospital
o Recovered AKI or
populations (e.g.,
recovered AKD
surgical patients only,
o Other similar
sepsis, trauma, malaria,
concepts
preterm neonates)
o Ad hoc, claims-based,
or unclear definition of
AKI or AKD

356

Population

Intervention/ predictor

Comparator

Outcomesa

Study designb

● People with AKD
● Exclude
o Ad hoc, claims-based,
or unclear definition of
AKI or AKD

● AKD diagnosis (with
our without known prior
AKI), defined by
KDIGO, RIFLE, AKIN
(or variants)

● Recovery from
AKI (without
AKD)
● None (no
comparator
necessary)

● Death, all-cause
● AKD requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Complete recovery
● CKD G3-G5 (at ≥90 days)
● CKD G5D (dialysis) (at ≥90
days)

● Comparative or single
group
● Exclude
o Case control study
● Published since 2013
● N≥1000 adults or ≥100
children

● Death
● AKI, any stage (incident) (at
risk population)
● AKI, stage 3 (incident)
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Diagnostic test accuracy
● Duration of AKI
● CKD G3-G5 (at ≥90 days)
● CKD G5D (dialysis) (at ≥90
days)

● Multivariable-adjusted,
longitudinal studies
● Direct comparisons of
different
thresholds/definitions,
with adjustment
● Diagnostic test analysis
(e.g., test accuracy),
with or without
adjustment
● For biomarkers:
existing SRs only

AF
T

Research questions
(RQ)
RQ 3: What is the
prognosis of patients
diagnosed with AKD?

● Alternate finding
● Alternate test

D
R

Chapter 2. AKI prediction, risk stratification, and diagnostic evaluation
RQ 4: For patients being
a) Clinical risk scores
● People at risk for
evaluated for or with
b) Clinical decision
AKI
established AKI, what is
support systems,
● People with
the (comparative) test
including alerts,
established AKI
accuracy of or association
NINJA, sniffers,
between specific
detectors
predictors or diagnostic
c) Specified prediction
tests and AKI outcomes?
models
d) Furosemide stress test
e) Kinetic eGFR
f) Urine microscopy
markers of acute
tubular necrosis
g) Biomarkers
(i) Clusterin
(ii) Cystatin-C
(iii) KIM-1
(iv) NAG
(v) NGAL
(vi) Osteopontin
(vii) TIMP2 x IGFBP7
(viii)Proenkephalin
(ix) L-FABP
(x) CCL-14
h) Biopsy/histology
features
i) Kidney imaging
(i) Ultrasound
(ii) MRI

357

Population

Intervention/ predictor

Comparator

Outcomesa

Study designb

● People at risk for
AKI
● People with
established AKI

● Use of tool or test listed
in RQ 4

● Not using tool or
test
● Alterative tool or
test

● Death
● AKI, any stage (incident) (at
risk population)
● AKI, stage 3 (incident)
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Duration of AKI
● CKD G3-G5 (at ≥90 days)
● CKD G5D (dialysis) (at ≥90
days)

● RCT

● Alternative
strategy, including
“usual care”

● Death, all-cause
● AKI, any stage (incident)
● AKI, stage 3 (incident)
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Duration of AKI
● CKD G3-G5 (at ≥90 days)
● CKD G5D (dialysis) (at ≥90
days)
● Serious adverse events (Stage
≥3)
o Fluid overload or heart failure

● RCT
● For comparison of
crystalloids and other
fluids: existing SRs or
network meta-analyses
only

● No i.v. amino
acids

● AKI, any stage (incident)
● AKI, stage 3 (incident)
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Duration of AKI
● Serious adverse events (Stage
≥3)
● Discontinuation due to AE

● RCT

● Crystalloids
o Balanced crystalloids
vs. other crystalloids
o Crystalloids vs.
synthetic colloids
o Crystalloids vs.
albumin
● Fluid amount: More vs.
less
● Oral vs. i.v. rehydration
● Protocolized
hemodynamic therapy
● Vasopressors
incorporated in a fluid
protocol
● Mean arterial pressure
targets
● AKI care bundle
● Intravenous (i.v.) amino
acids

D
R

Chapter 3. Prevention and treatment of AKI
RQ 6: For patients at risk
● People at increased
for developing AKI, what
risk for AKI
are the effects of fluid
o Inpatient
management strategies to
prevent AKI?

AF
T

Research questions
(RQ)
RQ 5: For patients being
evaluated for or with
established AKI, what are
the clinical effects of
using/implementing
specific predictors or
diagnostic tests on
subsequent AKI
outcomes?

RQ 7: For patients
undergoing cardiac
surgery, what are the
effects of prophylactic i.v.
amino acids on AKI
outcomes?

● People undergoing
cardiac surgery (at
increased risk for
AKI)

358

Population

Intervention/ predictor

Comparator

Outcomesa

Study designb

● Patients undergoing
cardiac surgery
● Exclude
o Received propofol
anesthesia

● Remote ischemic
preconditioning as part
of anesthesia or
preoperative protocol

● No remote
ischemic
preconditioning

● Death
● AKI, any stage (incident)
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Hospital duration
● Serious adverse events (Stage
≥3)

● RCT

● AKI, any stage (incident)
● AKI, stage 3 (incident)
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Duration of AKI
● Intensive care admission,
unplanned
● Death
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Duration of AKI
● CKD G3-G5 (at ≥90 days)
● CKD G5D (dialysis) (at ≥90
days)
● Serious adverse events (Stage
≥3)
● Death
● Reversal of HRS
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Duration of AKI
● Quality of life
● Serious adverse events (Stage
≥3)
● Discontinuation due to AE

● RCT

● Patients identified
with elevated SCr
o Inpatient or
outpatient

● People with AKI with
hypervolemia
o Inpatient

RQ 11: For patients with
HRS, what is the effect of
vasoactive agents on AKI
outcomes?

● People with
hepatorenal syndrome

● Automated alert (by
EHR system)

● No alert

● Extracorporeal (isolated
ultrafiltration, CRRT,
IHD) vs. diuretics (any)
● Continuous vs.
intermittent diuretics
● Furosemide (alone) vs.
furosemide + other
diuretic (combination)

● Alternative
intervention

● Terlipressin
● Midodrine + octreotide
● Norepinephrine

● No vasoactive
agent
● Alternative
vasoactive agent

D
R

RQ 10: For people with
AKI with hypervolemia,
with or without
cardiorenal syndrome,
what are the effects of
different fluid removal
approaches on AKI
outcomes?

AF
T

Research questions
(RQ)
RQ 8: For patients
undergoing cardiac
surgery, who do not
receive propofol
anesthetic, what are the
effects of remote ischemic
preconditioning on AKIrelated outcomes and
serious treatment-related
adverse effects?
RQ 9: For patients at risk
of and with established
AKI, what are the effects
of alert (vs. no alert) on
AKI outcomes?

359

● RCT

● RCT

Intervention/ predictor

Comparator

Outcomesa

Study designb

● People critically ill
with acidosis, with or
without AKI

● Intravenous bicarbonate

● No i.v.
bicarbonate

● Death
● AKI, stage 3 (incident)
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Hospital duration
● Serious adverse events (Stage
≥3)
● Discontinuation due to AE
● Death
● Resolution of TLS,
rhabdomyolysis, pigment
nephropathy
● AKI, stage 3 (incident)
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Duration of AKI
● CKD G3-G5 (at ≥90 days)
● CKD G5D (dialysis) (at ≥90
days)
● Serious adverse events (Stage
≥3)
o Discontinuation due to AE
o Rash (allopurinol)
o Stevens Johnson syndrome
(allopurinol)
o Toxic epidermal necrolysis
(allopurinol)
● Cytopenia (allopurinol)
● Death
● AKI, stage 3 (incident)
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Hospital duration
● Serious adverse events (Stage
≥3)
● Discontinuation due to AE

● RCT

● People with or at risk
for
o TLS, including with
myeloma
o Rhabdomyolysis
o Pigment
nephropathy

● Fluid strategies (for all
conditions)
● Allopurinol (for TLS)
● Rasburicase (for TLS)
● Febuxostat (for TLS)
● Bicarbonate (urine
alkalinization) (for all
conditions)
● Dialysis or
ultrafiltration (for all
conditions)

D
R

RQ 13: For patients with,
or at risk for, TLS,
rhabdomyolysis, or
pigment nephropathy,
what are the effects and
comparative effects of
specified treatments on
AKI outcomes?

Population

AF
T

Research questions
(RQ)
RQ 12: For patients
critically ill with acidosis,
with or without AKI, what
are the effects of i.v.
bicarbonate on AKI
outcomes?

RQ 14: For neonates with
neonatal asphyxia, what
are the effects of
theophylline on AKI
outcomes?

● Neonates with AKI
o Inpatient

● Theophylline

● No listed
intervention
● Alternative listed
intervention

● No theophylline

360

● RCT

● RCT
● Nonrandomized
comparative studies,
prospective or
retrospective

RQ 16: For children with
malaria, what are the
effects of
acetaminophen/paracetam
ol on AKI outcomes?

Population

Intervention/ predictor

Comparator

Outcomesa

Study designb

● Children undergoing
cardiopulmonary
bypass

● Nitric oxide, inhaled or
infused

● No nitric oxide

● Death
● AKI, stage 3 (incident)
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Hospital duration
● Serious adverse events (Stage
≥3)
● Discontinuation due to AE
● Death
● AKI, any stage (incident)
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Hospital duration
● Serious adverse events (Stage
≥3)
● Discontinuation due to AE

● RCT
● Nonrandomized
comparative studies,
prospective or
retrospective

● Children with malaria
(with or without AKI)

● Acetaminophen/
paracetamol
● Other antipyretic

● No acetaminophen
● Other antipyretic
(strategy)

D
R

Chapter 4. Drug and nephrotoxin-associated AKI

AF
T

Research questions
(RQ)
RQ 15: For children
undergoing
cardiopulmonary bypass,
what are the effects of
intraoperative nitric oxide
on AKI outcomes?

361

● RCT
● Nonrandomized
comparative studies,
prospective or
retrospective

Intervention/ predictor

Comparator

Outcomesa

Study designb

● People at increased
risk for AKI on
medications that put
them at risk for
nephrotoxic injury
● People with
established AKI who
are on medications
that put them at risk
for nephrotoxic injury
o In hospital or
Emergency
Department
● Exclude
o Receiving RRT

● Multimodal stewardship
o Therapeutic drug
monitoring of
▪ Antimicrobials
▪ Calcineurin
inhibitors
o Drug monitoring
▪ Drug-drug
interactions
▪ Nephrotoxic burden
surveillance
▪ Clinical decision
support systems
▪ Via EHR
o Kidney function
monitoring
(intensive, increased
vigilance, proactive)
● Pharmacist oversight (in
the ICU)
● Different dosing
regimens (continuous,
intermittent, extended,
daily) for
o Aminoglycosides
o Vancomycin
o Beta lactams
● Discontinuation of
o RASi
o Diuretics
o SGLT2i
o NSAIDs (specific to
surgical patients)
o Finerenone
o GLP-1 agonists

● No drug
stewardship
strategy
● Alternative
strategy

● Death, all-cause
● Death, drug-purpose related
(e.g., due to infection with
aminoglycoside dosing
regimen)
● AKI, any stage (incident)
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Duration of AKI`

● RCT
● Nonrandomized
comparative studies
with multivariable
adjustment or
matching, prospective
or retrospective

● Death, all-cause
● AKI, any stage (incident)
● AKI, stage 3 (incident)
● AKI requiring RRT
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Duration of AKI
● Hospital admission, unplanned
● Poor control of underlying
condition (e.g., hypertension,
heart failure, diabetes)

● RCT

AF
T

Population

D
R

Research questions
(RQ)
RQ 17: For patients with
or at risk for AKI who
are on medications that
put them at risk for
nephrotoxic injury, what
are the effects and
comparative effects of
drug stewardship
strategies?

RQ 18: For patients
undergoing medical or
surgical procedures, or
with acute illnesses who
are at increased risk of
AKI, what is the effect of
temporary cessation of
medications on AKI
outcomes?

● People at increased
risk for AKI due to
o Relevant medical
or surgical
procedures
o Acute illness
● Any setting

● Continue
medication

362

Population

Intervention/ predictor

Comparator

Outcomesa

Study designb

● People receiving
intravascular (i.v.,
intra-arterial)
iodinated contrast
agents

● Risk scores
● Specific, independent,
patient characteristics,
including past medical
history
● Specific, independent
settings, conditions,
scenarios
● Hydration (i.v. or oral)

● Alternate

● AKI, any stage (incident)
● Duration of AKI

● Diagnostic test
analysis, for scores
● Multivariable-adjusted,
longitudinal studies for
independent predictors
● N≥1000 adults or ≥100
children

● No hydration

● AKI, any stage (incident)
● Duration of AKI

● RCT

● Early initiation of RRT
● Delayed initiation of
RRT

● Standard (“late”)
initiation of RRT

● Death, all-cause
● Time on RRT
● Complete recovery
● Length of hospital stay
● Length of ICU stay
● CKD G3-G5 (at ≥90 days)
● CKD G5D (dialysis) (at ≥90
days)
● Serious adverse events (Stage
≥3)
o Electrolyte disorders
o Hemodynamic instability
o Hypophosphatemia
o Complications from line
insertion
o Bleeding
o Encephalopathy

● RCT

D
R

RQ 20: For people
● People receiving
undergoing imaging with
intravascular (i.v.,
intravascular iodinated
intra-arterial)
contrast agents, what are
iodinated contrast
the effects of hydration
agents
vs no hydration?
Chapter 5. Renal replacement therapy
RQ 21: For patients with
● People with AKI who
AKI who require RRT,
require (or are about
what are the comparative
to require) RRT
effects of early versus
standard (late) versus
delayed initiation of RRT
on AKI outcomes?

AF
T

Research questions
(RQ)
RQ 19: For people
undergoing imaging with
intravascular iodinated
contrast agents, what are
the factors that increase
the risk of AKI after
contrast?

363

Intervention/ predictor

Comparator

Outcomesa

Study designb

● People with AKI who
require (or are about
to require) RRT

● Continuous RRT
(CRRT)
● Intermittent
hemodialysis
o Short intermittent
o Prolonged
intermittent RRT
o Sustained low
efficiency dialysis
(SLED)
● Acute peritoneal
dialysis

● Alternative
modality or
variant

● RCT

● Different starting doses
● Based on urea reduction
ratio (URR)
● Based on Kt/V
(including weekly)
● Based on replacement
fluid / effluent volume

● Alternative
starting dose
● Alternative dose
or prescription

● Death, all-cause
● Time on RRT
● Complete recovery
● Length of hospital stay
● Length of ICU stay
● CKD G3-G5 (at ≥90 days)
● CKD G5D (dialysis) (at ≥90
days)
● Serious adverse events (Stage
≥3)
o Electrolyte disorders
o Hemodynamic instability
o Hypophosphatemia
o Complications from line
insertion
o Bleeding
o Encephalopathy
● Death, all-cause
● Time on RRT
● Complete recovery
● Length of hospital stay
● Length of ICU stay
● CKD G3-G5 (at ≥90 days)
● CKD G5D (dialysis) (at ≥90
days)
● Serious adverse events (Stage
≥3)
o Electrolyte disorders
o Hemodynamic instability
o Hypophosphatemia
o Complications from line
insertion
o Bleeding
o Encephalopathy

● People with AKI who
require RRT

D
R

RQ 23: For patients with
AKI undergoing RRT,
what are the comparative
effects of different RRT
dosing regimens or
prescriptions for small
solute clearance on AKI
outcomes?

Population

AF
T

Research questions
(RQ)
RQ 22: For patients with
AKI who require RRT,
what are the comparative
effects of different RRT
modalities on AKI
outcomes?

364

● RCT

Population

Intervention/ predictor

Comparator

Outcomesa

Study designb

● People with AKI who
require RRT

● Anticoagulation (vs. no
anticoagulation)
● Regional citrate
anticoagulation
● Unfractionated heparin
● Low molecular weight
heparin
● Direct thrombin
inhibitors
● Factor Xa inhibitors
● Prostacyclin /
Epoprostenol
● Argatroban
● Nafamostat
● Defined anticoagulation
protocols

● Alternative
intervention

● Clotting
● Serious adverse events (Stage
≥3)
o Discontinuation due to AE
o Bleed
o Stroke

● RCT

D
R

Chapter 6. Follow-up care after AKI and/or AKD

AF
T

Research questions
(RQ)
RQ 24: For patients with
AKI undergoing CRRT,
what are the comparative
effects of different
anticoagulation
approaches on AKI
outcomes?

365

Intervention/ predictor

Comparator

Outcomesa

Study designb

● People are post-AKI
(after an episode of
AKI)
● People with AKD
post-AKI
o Outpatient

● Specified care models
● Specified groups of
providers
● Transition of care
models

● Alternative
approach

● Process measures of CKD care
o Implementation of
recommended care
processes
o Restarting of medication of
prognostic benefit
o Medication adherence
● Immediate/Intermediate
clinical outcomes
o Hospital readmission
o Recurrent AKI
o Hypertension
o Volume overload
● Longer term clinical outcomes
o CKD G3-G5 (at ≥90 days)
o CKD G5D (dialysis) (at
≥90 days)
o Death, all-cause
o Major Adverse
Cardiovascular events
(MACE)
● Other health and care resource
use
o ED visits
o Hospital visits
o Primary care visits
o Social care costs
● Person-centered outcomes
o Health-related Quality of
Life
o Health status
o Symptom Burden
o Psychological Burden
(anxiety, depression, social
isolation)
o Treatment Burden
o Patient experience
o Self-management
o Loneliness

● RCT
● Multivariableadjusted, longitudinal
studies for
independent
predictors

AF
T

Population

D
R

Research questions
(RQ)
RQ 25: For patients who
have survived an episode
of AKI (“post-AKI”),
what are the effects or
comparative effects of
different care models or
interventions on health
and resource-use
outcomes?

366

Intervention/ predictor

Comparator

Outcomesa

Study designb

● People are post-AKI
(after an episode of
AKI)
● People with AKD
post-AKI
o Outpatient

● Resumption of
o RASi
o NSAIDs
o Finerenone
o GLP-1 agonists

● Not resuming
medications

● Death, all-cause
● Recurrent AKI episode
● MAKE (at ≥90 days)
● Poor control of underlying
condition (e.g., hypertension,
heart failure, diabetes)
● CKD G3-G5 (at ≥90 days)
● CKD G5D (dialysis) (at ≥90
days)
● Quality of life
● Serious adverse events (Stage
≥3)
● Discontinuation due to AE

● RCT
● Multivariableadjusted, longitudinal
studies for
independent
predictors

Bold outcomes are critical; un-bolded outcomes are important.111 bFor all topics, relevant existing systematic reviews of eligible primary studies were also
identified. AE, adverse events; AKD, acute kidney disease; AKI, acute kidney injury; AKIN, Acute Kidney Injury Network; CCL-14, C-C motif chemokine
ligand 14; CKD G3-G5, CKG grade 3 to 5; CKD G5D, chronic dialysis; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CRRT, continuous renal replacement therapy; EHR,
electronic health record; GLP-1 agonists, glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists; HRS, hepatorenal syndrome; i.v., intravenous; ICU, intensive care unit; IHD,
intermittent hemodialysis; KDIGO, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes; KIM-1, kidney injury molecule-1; L-FABP, liver fatty acid binding protein;
MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; NAG, N acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase; NGAL, neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin; NINJA, Nephrotoxic Injury
Negated by Just-in time Action; NSAIDs, nonsteroid anti-inflammatory drugs; PICOS, Population, Intervention, Comparator, Outcomes, and Study design; RASi,
renin-angiotensin system inhibitors; RCT, randomized controlled trial; RIFLE, Risk, Injury, Failure, Loss of kidney function, and End-stage kidney disease; RQ,
Research Question; RRT, renal replacement therapy; SCr, serum creatinine; SGLT2i, sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors; SR, systematic review;
TIMP2xIGFBP7, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 and insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 7; TLS, tumor-lysis syndrome; UO, urine output.

D
R

a

Population

AF
T

Research questions
(RQ)
RQ 26: For patients who
have survived an episode
of AKI (“post-AKI”),
what are the effects of
resuming (vs. not
resuming) medications on
clinical outcomes?

367

Literature search and article selection
Searches were conducted in MEDLINE (via PubMed) and Embase from 2013 (after
publication of the KDIGO 2012 AKI Guideline) through January to June 2025, on a rolling
basis, with an update during public review in March/April 2026. The search strategies for
all databases are provided in Appendix A: Supplementary Tables S1. Throughout the
systematic review and guideline development process, additional studies suggested by the
Work Group were assessed for eligibility and incorporated as appropriate.

AF
T

The unique titles and abstracts resulting from the searches were screened in
duplicate by members of the ERT, using the web-based screening tools SRDRplus or the
VADRR platform (https://vadrr.org/), which use large language models to sort abstracts
based on likely relevance. To simplify the screening process, topics were batched by
similarity and reviewed in batches. Once the team established a shared consensus through
initial group reviews, the remaining abstracts were screened in duplicate, with adjudication
of conflicts by the whole team. The process for each batch ended either when the batch was
fully screened or when 400 consecutive abstracts were rejected suggesting a <1% chance of
finding more relevant studies. All potentially relevant studies were retrieved in full text and
rescreened in duplicate, with full team adjudication of conflicts.

R

For topics with high quality existing systematic reviews, the ERT sought additional
eligible primary studies published subsequent to the review in most cases and also included
other eligible studies found to have been omitted by the reviews. As noted in Table 63,
existing systematic reviews of biomarkers used to predict AKI (RQ 4) or comparisons of
intravenous fluids (RQ 6) were not updated.

D

The search identified 34,835 individual citations (Figure 23), if which1174 were
identified for full-text screening, plus an additional 79 additional records suggested by
Work Group members or found in reference lists of existing systematic reviews or
guidelines. Ultimately, 355 studies, including both primary studies and systematic reviews,
were included. These include 72 for Chapter 1, 59 for Chapter 2, 108 for Chapter 3, 57 for
Chapter 4, 37 for Chapter 5, and 22 for Chapter 6.

368

AF
T
R

D

Figure 23 | Search yield and study flow diagram. C, comparator; D, study design; E,
exposure(s); ESR, existing systematic review; I, intervention(s); O, outcome(s); P,
population
Data extraction
Data extraction, from primary studies and existing systematic reviews, was
performed by one ERT member and confirmed by a second member of the ERT. Any
differences among members of the ERT were resolved through discussion. A third reviewer
was included if consensus could not be achieved. For some topics with existing systematic
reviews that did not provide sufficiently complete reporting of study descriptions or results
data or did not evaluate prioritized outcomes that were likely to have been reported, the
ERT sought the primary studies and extracted from these.

369

Risk of bias of studies
Studies were assessed for risk of bias and methodological concerns. The ERT used
the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool to evaluate risk of bias for RCTs1275 based on the risk of
selection bias, performance bias, detection bias, attrition bias, reporting bias, and other
potential biases.

AF
T

For nonrandomized, observational comparative studies of interventions, pertinent
questions from the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool pertaining to outcome assessor blinding,
incomplete outcome data, and selective reporting were used as were selected questions
from the Risk Of Bias In Non-Randomized Studies - of Interventions (ROBINS-I) tool.1276
Specifically, comparative studies were evaluated as to whether evaluated cohorts were
comparable and whether potential confounders were accounted for.
For all intervention studies, including single group studies, it was determined
whether analyses were intention-to-treat were per-protocol, whether selection of
participants into the study was based on participant characteristics observed after the start
of intervention, selective reporting, whether there was clear reporting without
discrepancies, clear eligibility criteria, adequately described interventions, and adequate
outcome definition. For all studies, other potential biases or methodological problems of
note were also captured. Where methodological issues may have pertained only to some
reported outcomes, this was noted.

D

R

Risk of bias of diagnostic test studies was assessed using the Quality Assessment of
Diagnostic Accuracy Studies-1 (QUADAS 2) tool1277 with selected questions pertaining to
sample selection, blinding, prespecified methods, and completeness of data and analyses.
For association studies that evaluated potential predictors of outcomes, risk of bias was
assessed based on completeness and appropriateness of sample selection and analyses,
definitions of predictors and outcomes, completeness of reporting, and other methodologic
and reporting issues, all of which were notated.
Risk of bias for existing systematic reviews was assessed based on the Assessment
of Multiple Systematic Reviews 2 (AMSTAR 2) quality assessment tool.1278 Systematic
reviews were consider to be of high quality if at least 2 electronic databases were searched
(including either MEDLINE or Embase); there was a clear description of study eligibility
criteria, duplicate screening, explicit check of extracted data by another researcher, risk of
bias assessment; and appropriate meta-analysis methods were used. Systematic reviews that
were of poor quality solely due to poor meta-analysis methods, but were otherwise eligible,
were maintained but all pertinent meta-analyses were conducted again.

370

All risk of bias assessments were conducted independently by 2 members of the
ERT, with disagreements resolved by internal discussion and consultation with a third ERT
member, as needed.
Evidence synthesis and meta-analysis
Data for each topic was presented to the Work Group in summary tables describing
study characteristics, interventions (or prediction factors), outcomes, results data, summary
results, and risk of bias.

AF
T

Measures of treatment effect – All evaluated outcomes of interventions were
dichotomous. Thus, results that were summarized or meta-analyzed by the ERT were
expressed as RRs or HRs with 95% CIs. Results summarized by existing systematic
reviews were extracted in the metric reported (e.g., OR) and were typically not converted to
RRs. Analyses of associations were extracted in the reported metrics, preferentially
including the most-adjusted analyses. For diagnostic test studies, the ERT extracted
reported measures of test accuracy, including sensitivity and specificity, receiver operating
characteristic area under the curve, and likelihood ratios.

R

Data synthesis - Meta-analysis was conducted if there were 3 or more studies that
were sufficiently similar with respect to key variables (population characteristics, study
duration, comparisons). The ERT used their judgment to determine sufficient similarities.
Meta-analyses were not excluded solely for statistical heterogeneity (differences across
studies in effect size estimates). Restricted maximum likelihood (REML) model metaanalyses of the risk ratio for outcomes in Stata were conducted. Where pertinent, the ERT
combined existing systematic reviews with additional primary studies using the same
approach as de novo meta-analysis, using data from all primary studies.

D

Assessment of heterogeneity – Heterogeneity was assessed by visual inspection of
forest plots of standardized mean effect sizes and of RRs, and χ2 tests. A P < 0.05 was used
to denote statistical heterogeneity, with an I2 calculated to measure the proportion of total
variation in the estimates of treatment effect that was due to heterogeneity beyond chance.
Grading the certainty of the evidence
The certainty of the evidence related to each critical and important outcome was
assessed based on a GRADE approach (Table 64),1274 which assesses the certainty of the
evidence for each outcome, with some modifications. For each outcome, the initial grade
for the certainty of evidence started at “high” but was then lowered if there were serious
methodological limitations (i.e., risk of bias) across the aggregate of studies, if there were
clinically important inconsistencies in the results across studies or large statistically
heterogeneity by meta-analysis (unless the direction of effect was consistent), if there was
371

uncertainty about the directness of evidence (including limited applicability of the findings
to the population of interest), if the outcome measure estimates were imprecise or based on
sparse studies, or if there was thought to be a high likelihood of reporting bias. The final
grade for the certainty of the evidence for an outcome could be high (A), moderate (B), low
(C), or very low (D) (Table 65). If there was a large degree of unexplained inconsistency
across studies, very imprecise summary estimates of effect, or only a single small study, the
certainty of evidence for the given outcome was rated very low.

AF
T

In determining the overall certainty of evidence for each comparison of
interventions (or diagnostic test), the primary purpose of the intervention was
prioritized when assessing across prioritized outcomes. Thus, for interventions to
predict or prevent AKI, the overall certainty of evidence was determined first based
on the certainty of evidence for incident AKI. However, if the certainty of evidence
for mortality or other prioritized AKI-related outcomes was greater than for incident
AKI, the overall certainty of evidence was graded per the other prioritized outcomes.
Similarly for interventions primarily used to manage AKI, the overall certainty of
evidence was first determined based on RRT but was upgraded if the certainty of
evidence for death or MAKE were higher than for RRT.

D

R

Evidence profiles
Evidence profiles were developed to include a description of the population and the
intervention and comparator. In addition, the evidence profiles include risk of bias rating
and results from the data synthesis. The grading of the certainty of the evidence for each
critical and important outcome is also provided in these tables (Data Supplement
Appendixes C and D).

372

Table 64 | GRADE system for grading the certainty of evidence
Step 1—Starting
Step 2—Lower
Step 3—Raise grade for
Study design
grade for the
grade
observational studies
certainty of the
evidence
RCT

High

Study limitations:
–1, serious
–2, very serious

Strength of association
+1, large effect size (e.g., <0.5
or >2)
+2, very large effect size (e.g.,
<0.2 or >5)

Inconsistency:
–1, serious
Evidence of a dose–response
–2, very serious
gradient
Observational
Low
Indirectness:
All plausible confounding
–1, serious
would reduce the demonstrated
–2, very serious
effect
Very low
Imprecision:
–1 serious
–2 very serious
-3 extremely
serious
Publication bias:
–1 strongly
suspected
GRADE, Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation; RCT,
randomized controlled trial.

AF
T

Moderate

High

We are confident that the true effect is close to the estimate of the
effect.
The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but
there is a possibility that it is substantially different.
The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of
the effect.
The estimate of effect is very uncertain, and often it will be far from
the true effect.

D

A

R

Table 65 | Classification for certainty of evidence
Grade Certainty
Meaning
of evidence

B

Moderate

C

Low

D

Very low

Developing the recommendations
Recommendations from the KDIGO 2012 Clinical Practice Guideline for Acute
Kidney Injury were considered in the context of new evidence and current standards of care
by the Work Group Co-Chairs and Work Group members and updated as appropriate.608
Practice points were not yet proposed as a separate category in 2012, so the KDIGO 2026
Work Group considered the following options: (i) where new evidence did not suggest a
373

change to graded recommendations, the statements were retained as graded
recommendations; (ii) graded recommendations were updated, where appropriate, based on
new evidence; (iii) existing recommendations that fit the criteria for practice points were
rewritten as practice points; and (iv) new guideline statements (both recommendations and
practice points) were generated for new clinical questions in the 2026 update.

AF
T

Grading the strength of the recommendations
The strength of a recommendation was classified by the Work Group as Level 1,
“We recommend” or Level 2, “We suggest” (Table 66). The strength of a recommendation
was determined by the balance of benefits and harms across all critical and important
outcomes, the grading of the overall certainty of the evidence, patient values and
preferences, resource use and costs, and considerations for implementation (Table 67).

D

R

Table 66 | KDIGO nomenclature and description for grading recommendations
Grade
Implications
Patients
Clinicians
Policy
Level 1,
Most people in your
Most patients should
The recommendation
“We
situation would want
receive the
can be evaluated as a
recommend”
the recommended
recommended course
candidate for
course of action, and
of action.
developing a policy or
only a small proportion
a performance
would not.
measure.
Level 2,
The majority of people
Different choices will
The recommendation is
“We
in your situation would
be appropriate for
likely to require
suggest”
want the recommended
different patients. Each
substantial debate and
course of action, but
patient needs help to
involvement of
many would not.
arrive at a management
stakeholders before
decision consistent
policy can be
with her or his values
determined.
and preferences.
KDIGO, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes.

374

AF
T

Table 67 | Determinants of the strength of recommendation
Factors
Comment
Balance of benefits and
The larger the difference between the desirable and undesirable effects, the
harms
more likely a Level 1 recommendation is provided. The narrower the
gradient, the more likely a Level 2 recommendation is provided.
Certainty of evidence
The higher the certainty of the evidence, the more likely a Level 1
recommendation is warranted. However, there are exceptions for which low
or very low certainty of the evidence will warrant a Level 1 recommendation.
Values and preferences
The more variability in values and preferences, or the more uncertainty in
values and preferences, the more likely a Level 1 recommendation is
warranted. Values and preferences were obtained from the literature, when
possible, or were assessed by the judgment of the Work Group when robust
evidence was not identified.
Resource use and costs
The higher the cost of an intervention—that is, the more resources
consumed—the less likely a Level 1 recommendation is warranted.

Balance of benefits and harms - The Work Group determined the anticipated net
health benefit on the basis of expected benefits and harms across all critical and important
outcomes from the underlying evidence review.

D

R

Overall certainty of evidence - The overall certainty of the evidence for each
recommendation was determined by the certainty of evidence for all critical and important
outcomes, considering the relative importance of each outcome to the population of
interest, as described above. For recommendations about diagnostic test studies, where
there was evidence only for the diagnostic accuracy of the tests (e.g., to predict AKI) and
no evidence from RCTs that implemented the diagnostic tests, the overall certainty of the
evidence to support the recommendation was downgraded 1 level due to indirectness of the
evidence. In addition, when eligible studies included only adults for a given specific topic,
the pediatricians in the Work Group, together with the Co-Chairs and Methods Committee
representatives, determined whether there was concern about applicability to children and,
where there was, the overall certainty of the evidence to support the recommendation was
also downgraded one level due to indirectness. In these instances, the downgrading is
explained in each certainty of evidence description. The final grade for the certainty of the
evidence for an outcome could be high (A), moderate (B), low (C), or very low (D) (Tables
64 and 65).
Patient values and preferences - The Work Group included 2 people with lived
experience of AKI. These members’ unique perspectives and lived experience, in addition
to the Work Group understanding of patient preferences and priorities, informed decisions
about the strength of the recommendations. A systematic review of qualitative studies on
patient priorities and preferences was not undertaken for this guideline.

375

Resource use and costs - Healthcare and non-healthcare resources, including all
inputs in the treatment management pathway, were considered in grading the strength of a
recommendation.468 The following resources were considered: direct healthcare costs, non–
healthcare resources (such as transportation and social services), informal caregiver
resources (e.g., time of family and caregivers), and changes in productivity. No formal
economic evaluations, including cost-effectiveness analysis, were conducted.

AF
T

Practice points
In addition to graded recommendations, KDIGO guidelines now include practice
points to help healthcare professionals better evaluate and implement the guidance from the
expert Work Group. Practice points are consensus statements about a specific aspect of
care and supplement recommendations. Although systematic reviews are not performed for
clinical questions underlying practice points, they are often crafted to help readers
implement the guidance from graded recommendations. Practice points represent the expert
judgment of the guideline Work Group, and they may be based on limited evidence.
Practice points are sometimes formatted as a table, a figure, or an algorithm, to make them
easier to use in clinical practice.

R

Format for guideline recommendations and practice points
Each guideline recommendation provides an assessment of the strength of the
recommendation (Level 1, “we recommend” or Level 2, “we suggest”) and the overall
certainty of the evidence (high [A], moderate [B], low [C], very low [D]). The
recommendation statements are followed by Key information (Balance of benefits and
harms, Certainty of the evidence, Values and preferences, Resource use and costs,
Considerations for implementation) and Rationale. Each recommendation is linked to a
relevant evidence profile. An underlying rationale may also support a practice point.

D

Limitations of the guideline development process
Although the literature searches were intended to be comprehensive, they were not
exhaustive. MEDLINE and Embase databases were searched, but other specialty or
regional databases were not. Hand searches of journals were not performed, and review
articles and textbook chapters were not systematically searched; however, existing
systematic review and clinical practice guidelines were hand-searched. In addition, any
important studies known to domain experts that were missed by the electronic literature
searches were added to retrieved articles and reviewed by the Work Group for eligibility.
The ERT did not systematically review all topics of interventions that are amenable
to trials. Topics were prioritized by the Work Group. Other topics were addressed by
practice points. Almost all research questions pertaining to interventions were restricted to
RCTs. Other study designs that may inform the guideline were not systematically
376

D

R

AF
T

reviewed. We did not review qualitative research studies (e.g., focus groups) to inform
determinations about values and preferences, or cost-effectiveness analyses to inform
determinations about resource use or costs.

377

REFERENCES
Mehta RL, Kellum JA, Shah SV, et al. Acute Kidney Injury Network: report of an
initiative to improve outcomes in acute kidney injury. Crit Care 2007; 11: R31.

2.

Zarbock A, Kullmar M, Ostermann M, et al. Prevention of Cardiac Surgery-Associated
Acute Kidney Injury by Implementing the KDIGO Guidelines in High-Risk Patients
Identified by Biomarkers: The PrevAKI-Multicenter Randomized Controlled Trial.
Anesth Analg 2021; 133: 292-302.

3.

Hoste EA, McCullough PA, Kashani K, et al. Derivation and validation of cutoffs for
clinical use of cell cycle arrest biomarkers. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2014; 29: 20542061.

4.

Meersch M, Schmidt C, Hoffmeier A, et al. Prevention of cardiac surgery-associated AKI
by implementing the KDIGO guidelines in high risk patients identified by biomarkers:
the PrevAKI randomized controlled trial. Intensive Care Med 2017; 43: 1551-1561.

5.

Gocze I, Jauch D, Gotz M, et al. Biomarker-guided Intervention to Prevent Acute Kidney
Injury After Major Surgery: The Prospective Randomized BigpAK Study. Ann Surg
2018; 267: 1013-1020.

6.

Zarbock A, Ostermann M, Forni L, et al. A preventive care strategy to reduce moderate
or severe acute kidney injury after major surgery (BigpAK-2); a multinational,
randomised clinical trial. Lancet 2025; 406: 2782-2791.

7.

Tecson KM, Erhardtsen E, Eriksen PM, et al. Optimal cut points of plasma and urine
neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin for the prediction of acute kidney injury among
critically ill adults: retrospective determination and clinical validation of a prospective
multicentre study. BMJ Open 2017; 7: e016028.

R

Haase M, Devarajan P, Haase-Fielitz A, et al. The outcome of neutrophil gelatinaseassociated lipocalin-positive subclinical acute kidney injury: a multicenter pooled
analysis of prospective studies. J Am Coll Cardiol 2011; 57: 1752-1761.

D

8.

AF
T

1.

9.

Albert C, Zapf A, Haase M, et al. Neutrophil Gelatinase-Associated Lipocalin Measured
on Clinical Laboratory Platforms for the Prediction of Acute Kidney Injury and the
Associated Need for Dialysis Therapy: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Am J
Kidney Dis 2020; 76: 826-841 e821.

10.

Perazella MA, Coca SG, Hall IE, et al. Urine microscopy is associated with severity and
worsening of acute kidney injury in hospitalized patients. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2010;
5: 402-408.

378

Bagshaw SM, Haase M, Haase-Fielitz A, et al. A prospective evaluation of urine
microscopy in septic and non-septic acute kidney injury. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2012;
27: 582-588.

12.

Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Acute Kidney Injury Work
Group.. KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Acute Kidney Injury. Kidney Int 2012; 2:
1-138.

13.

Haines RW, Fowler AJ, Liang K, et al. Comparison of Cystatin C and Creatinine in the
Assessment of Measured Kidney Function during Critical Illness. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
2023; 18: 997-1005.

14.

Hooper L, Heung M, Kenes M, et al. The Kinetics of Cystatin C and Serum Creatinine in
AKI. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2025; 20: 477-484.

15.

Lan H, Liu X, Yang D, et al. Comparing diagnostic accuracy of biomarkers for acute
kidney injury after major surgery: A PRISMA systematic review and network metaanalysis. Medicine (Baltimore) 2023; 102: e35284.

16.

Meena J, Thomas CC, Kumar J, et al. Biomarkers for prediction of acute kidney injury in
pediatric patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis of diagnostic test accuracy
studies. Pediatr Nephrol 2023; 38: 3241-3251.

17.

Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) CKD Work Group. KDIGO
2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of Chronic Kidney
Disease. Kidney Int 2024; 105: S117-S314.
Inker LA, Eneanya ND, Coresh J, et al. New Creatinine- and Cystatin C-Based Equations
to Estimate GFR without Race. N Engl J Med 2021; 385: 1737-1749.
Bagshaw SM, Uchino S, Cruz D, et al. A comparison of observed versus estimated
baseline creatinine for determination of RIFLE class in patients with acute kidney injury.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2009; 24: 2739-2744.

D

19.

R

18.

AF
T

11.

20.

Bernardi MH, Schmidlin D, Ristl R, et al. Serum Creatinine Back-Estimation in Cardiac
Surgery Patients: Misclassification of AKI Using Existing Formulae and a Data-Driven
Model. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2016; 11: 395-404.

21.

Graversen HV, Jensen SK, Vestergaard SV, et al. Defining Baseline Creatinine for
Identification of AKI in Population-Based Laboratory Databases: A Danish Nationwide
Cohort Study. Kidney360 2022; 3: 232-241.

22.

Pickering JW, Endre ZH. Back-calculating baseline creatinine with MDRD misclassifies
acute kidney injury in the intensive care unit. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2010; 5: 1165-1173.

379

Siew ED, Matheny ME, Ikizler TA, et al. Commonly used surrogates for baseline renal
function affect the classification and prognosis of acute kidney injury. Kidney Int 2010;
77: 536-542.

24.

Thongprayoon C, Cheungpasitporn W, Harrison AM, et al. The comparison of the
commonly used surrogates for baseline renal function in acute kidney injury diagnosis
and staging. BMC Nephrol 2016; 17: 6.

25.

Kellum JA, Sileanu FE, Murugan R, et al. Classifying AKI by Urine Output versus
Serum Creatinine Level. J Am Soc Nephrol 2015; 26: 2231-2238.

26.

Priyanka P, Zarbock A, Izawa J, et al. The impact of acute kidney injury by serum
creatinine or urine output criteria on major adverse kidney events in cardiac surgery
patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2021; 162: 143-151 e147.

27.

Bianchi NA, Altarelli M, Monard C, et al. Identification of an optimal threshold to define
oliguria in critically ill patients: an observational study. Crit Care 2023; 27: 207.

28.

Bianchi NA, Stavart LL, Altarelli M, et al. Association of Oliguria With Acute Kidney
Injury Diagnosis, Severity Assessment, and Mortality Among Patients With Critical
Illness. JAMA Netw Open 2021; 4: e2133094.

29.

Quan S, Pannu N, Wilson T, et al. Prognostic implications of adding urine output to
serum creatinine measurements for staging of acute kidney injury after major surgery: a
cohort study. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2016; 31: 2049-2056.

30.

Wang HE, Jain G, Glassock RJ, et al. Comparison of absolute serum creatinine changes
versus Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes consensus definitions for
characterizing stages of acute kidney injury. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2013; 28: 14471454.

R

Machado GD, Santos LL, Liborio AB. Redefining urine output thresholds for acute
kidney injury criteria in critically Ill patients: a derivation and validation study. Crit Care
2024; 28: 272.

D

31.

AF
T

23.

32.

Stanski N, Menon S, Goldstein SL, et al. Integration of urinary neutrophil gelatinaseassociated lipocalin with serum creatinine delineates acute kidney injury phenotypes in
critically ill children. J Crit Care 2019; 53: 1-7.

33.

Pipili C, Ioannidou S, Tripodaki ES, et al. Prediction of the renal replacement therapy
requirement in mechanically ventilated critically ill patients by combining biomarkers for
glomerular filtration and tubular damage. J Crit Care 2014; 29: 692 e697-613.

34.

Hoste E, Bihorac A, Al-Khafaji A, et al. Identification and validation of biomarkers of
persistent acute kidney injury: the RUBY study. Intensive Care Med 2020; 46: 943-953.
380

Vincent K, Rutledge A, Laney Z, et al. Recurrent neonatal acute kidney injury: incidence,
predictors, and outcomes in the neonatal intensive care unit. J Perinatol 2024; 44: 428433.

36.

Rutledge AD, Griffin RL, Vincent K, et al. Incidence, Risk Factors, and Outcomes
Associated With Recurrent Neonatal Acute Kidney Injury in the AWAKEN Study. JAMA
Netw Open 2024; 7: e2355307.

37.

Ruth A, Basu RK, Gillespie S, et al. Early and late acute kidney injury: temporal profile
in the critically ill pediatric patient. Clin Kidney J 2022; 15: 311-319.

38.

Wang H, Lambourg E, Guthrie B, et al. Patient outcomes following AKI and AKD: a
population-based cohort study. BMC Med 2022; 20: 229.

39.

Peerapornratana S, Fiorentino M, Priyanka P, et al. Recovery after AKI: Effects on
outcomes over 15 years. J Crit Care 2023; 76: 154280.

40.

Ozrazgat-Baslanti T, Loftus TJ, Ren Y, et al. Association of persistent acute kidney
injury and renal recovery with mortality in hospitalised patients. BMJ Health Care
Inform 2021; 28: e100458.

41.

Meersch M, Weiss R, Strauss C, et al. Acute kidney disease beyond day 7 after major
surgery: a secondary analysis of the EPIS-AKI trial. Intensive Care Med 2024; 50: 247257.

42.

Koyner JL, Mackey RH, Rosenthal NA, et al. Clinical Outcomes of Persistent Severe
Acute Kidney Injury among Patients with Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes
Stage 2 or 3 Acute Kidney Injury. Am J Nephrol 2022; 53: 816-825.

R

Koyner JL, Mackey RH, Rosenthal NA, et al. Health Care Resource Utilization and
Costs of Persistent Severe Acute Kidney Injury (PS-AKI) Among Hospitalized Stage 2/3
AKI Patients. Kidney360 2023; 4: 316-325.

D

43.

AF
T

35.

44.

Jensen SK, Heide-Jorgensen U, Gammelager H, et al. Acute Kidney Injury Duration and
20-Year Risks of CKD and Cardiovascular Disease. Kidney Int Rep 2024; 9: 817-829.

45.

Gomez H, Chen X, Minturn JS, et al. Persistent severe acute kidney injury is a major
modifiable determinant of outcome during critical illness. Intensive Care Med 2025; 51:
542-555.

46.

Altawalbeh SM, Wali LM, Alshogran OY, et al. Incidence, predictors, clinical outcomes,
and economic burden of recurrent acute kidney injury: a retrospective cohort study. Curr
Med Res Opin 2023; 39: 399-407.

381

Adegboyega OO, Singh Y, Bhutada A, et al. Recurrent acute kidney injury in preterm
neonates is common and associated with worse outcomes and higher mortality. Pediatr
Res 2022; 92: 284-290.

48.

Warnock DG, Powell TC, Donnelly JP, et al. Categories of Hospital-Associated Acute
Kidney Injury: Time Course of Changes in Serum Creatinine Values. Nephron 2015;
131: 227-236.

49.

Warnock DG, Neyra JA, Macedo E, et al. Comparison of Static and Dynamic Baseline
Creatinine Surrogates for Defining Acute Kidney Injury. Nephron 2021; 145: 664-674.

50.

Walker H, De Souza N, Hapca S, et al. Effect of multiple episodes of acute kidney injury
on mortality: an observational study. Clin Kidney J 2021; 14: 696-703.

51.

Truche AS, Ragey SP, Souweine B, et al. ICU survival and need of renal replacement
therapy with respect to AKI duration in critically ill patients. Ann Intensive Care 2018; 8:
127.

52.

Quiroga B, Sanz Sainz M, Santos Sanchez-Rey B, et al. Persistent kidney dysfunction
after acute kidney injury predicts short-term outpatient mortality. Intern Med J 2022; 52:
834-840.

53.

Ponce D, Zamoner W, Batistoco MM, et al. Changing epidemiology and outcomes of
acute kidney injury in Brazilian patients: a retrospective study from a teaching hospital.
Int Urol Nephrol 2020; 52: 1915-1922.

54.

Pannu N, James M, Hemmelgarn B, et al. Association between AKI, recovery of renal
function, and long-term outcomes after hospital discharge. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2013;
8: 194-202.

R

Liu KD, Yang J, Tan TC, et al. Risk Factors for Recurrent Acute Kidney Injury in a
Large Population-Based Cohort. Am J Kidney Dis 2019; 73: 163-173.

D

55.

AF
T

47.

56.

Korenkevych D, Ozrazgat-Baslanti T, Thottakkara P, et al. The Pattern of Longitudinal
Change in Serum Creatinine and 90-Day Mortality After Major Surgery. Ann Surg 2016;
263: 1219-1227.

57.

Heung M, Steffick DE, Zivin K, et al. Acute Kidney Injury Recovery Pattern and
Subsequent Risk of CKD: An Analysis of Veterans Health Administration Data. Am J
Kidney Dis 2016; 67: 742-752.

58.

Chawla LS, Bellomo R, Bihorac A, et al. Acute kidney disease and renal recovery:
consensus report of the Acute Disease Quality Initiative (ADQI) 16 Workgroup. Nat Rev
Nephrol 2017; 13: 241-257.

382

Lameire NH, Levin A, Kellum JA, et al. Harmonizing acute and chronic kidney disease
definition and classification: report of a Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
(KDIGO) Consensus Conference. Kidney Int 2021; 100: 516-526.

60.

Yang C, Tonelli M, James MT, et al. Incidence and Adverse Outcomes of Acute Kidney
Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Am J Kidney Dis 2025. doi:
10.1053/j.ajkd.2025.05.008

61.

James MT, Levey AS, Tonelli M, et al. Incidence and Prognosis of Acute Kidney
Diseases and Disorders Using an Integrated Approach to Laboratory Measurements in a
Universal Health Care System. JAMA Netw Open 2019; 2: e191795.

62.

Mauroner L, Kellum JA, Levey AS, et al. The Incidence and Outcomes of Acute Kidney
Disease in Critically Ill Children. Kidney360 2025; 6: 543-549.

63.

Patidar KR, Naved MA, Grama A, et al. Acute kidney disease is common and associated
with poor outcomes in patients with cirrhosis and acute kidney injury. J Hepatol 2022;
77: 108-115.

64.

Tonon M, Rosi S, Gambino CG, et al. Natural history of acute kidney disease in patients
with cirrhosis. J Hepatol 2021; 74: 578-583.

65.

Chen JJ, Lee TH, Kuo G, et al. Acute Kidney Disease After Acute Decompensated Heart
Failure. Kidney Int Rep 2022; 7: 526-536.

66.

Chen S, Tang Z, Xiang H, et al. Etiology and Outcome of Crescentic Glomerulonephritis
From a Single Center in China: A 10-Year Review. Am J Kidney Dis 2016; 67: 376-383.

R

Guthrie G, Guthrie B, Walker H, et al. Developing an AKI Consensus Definition for
Database Research: Findings From a Scoping Review and Expert Opinion Using a Delphi
Process. Am J Kidney Dis 2022; 79: 488-496 e481.

D

67.

AF
T

59.

68.

Sawhney S, Ball W, Bell S, et al. Recovery of kidney function after acute kidney diseasea multi-cohort analysis. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2024; 39: 426-435.

69.

Sawhney S, Marks A, Fluck N, et al. Intermediate and Long-term Outcomes of Survivors
of Acute Kidney Injury Episodes: A Large Population-Based Cohort Study. Am J Kidney
Dis 2017; 69: 18-28.

70.

Ziegelasch N, Vogel M, Muller E, et al. Cystatin C serum levels in healthy children are
related to age, gender, and pubertal stage. Pediatr Nephrol 2019; 34: 449-457.

71.

Joyce EL, DeAlmeida DR, Fuhrman DY, et al. eResearch in acute kidney injury: a
primer for electronic health record research. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2019; 34: 401-407.
383

Braun C, Rahman A, Macomb E, et al. Derivation and evaluation of baseline creatinine
equations for hospitalized children and adolescents: the AKI baseline creatinine equation.
Pediatr Nephrol 2022; 37: 3223-3233.

73.

Bjornstad EC, Acharjee MK, Rahman A, et al. Acute Kidney Injury Diagnostic Accuracy
and Implications of Different Baseline Creatinine Equations. Kidney Int Rep 2025; 10:
3444-3455.

74.

Hessey E, Ali R, Dorais M, et al. Evaluation of height-dependent and height-independent
methods of estimating baseline serum creatinine in critically ill children. Pediatr Nephrol
2017; 32: 1953-1962.

75.

Zappitelli M, Parikh CR, Akcan-Arikan A, et al. Ascertainment and epidemiology of
acute kidney injury varies with definition interpretation. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3:
948-954.

76.

Arant BS, Jr. Postnatal development of renal function during the first year of life. Pediatr
Nephrol 1987; 1: 308-313.

77.

Gallini F, Maggio L, Romagnoli C, et al. Progression of renal function in preterm
neonates with gestational age < or = 32 weeks. Pediatr Nephrol 2000; 15: 119-124.

78.

Jose PA, Fildes RD, Gomez RA, et al. Neonatal renal function and physiology. Curr
Opin Pediatr 1994; 6: 172-177.

79.

Ahn HC, Frymoyer A, Boothroyd DB, et al. Acute kidney injury in neonates with
hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy based on serum creatinine decline compared to
KDIGO criteria. Pediatr Nephrol 2024; 39: 2789-2796.

R

Gupta C, Massaro AN, Ray PE. A new approach to define acute kidney injury in term
newborns with hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy. Pediatr Nephrol 2016; 31: 1167-1178.

D

80.

AF
T

72.

81.

Aperia A, Broberger O, Elinder G, et al. Postnatal development of renal function in preterm and full-term infants. Acta Paediatr Scand 1981; 70: 183-187.

82.

Leake RD, Trygstad CW. Glomerular filtration rate during the period of adaptation to
extrauterine life. Pediatr Res 1977; 11: 959-962.

83.

Askenazi DJ, Heagerty PJ, Schmicker RH, et al. Prevalence of acute kidney injury (AKI)
in extremely low gestational age neonates (ELGAN). Pediatr Nephrol 2020; 35: 17371748.

84.

Charlton JR, Boohaker L, Askenazi D, et al. Late onset neonatal acute kidney injury:
results from the AWAKEN Study. Pediatr Res 2019; 85: 339-348.
384

Chishala M, Machona-Muyunda S, Mwaba C. Acute Kidney Injury in Neonates
Admitted to a Low-Resource Neonatal Intensive Care Unit in Lusaka, Zambia. Can J
Kidney Health Dis 2024; 11: 20543581241263160.

86.

Gul R, Anwar Z, Sheikh M, et al. Neonatal AKI profile using KDIGO guidelines: A
cohort study in tertiary care hospital ICU of Lahore, Pakistan. Front Pediatr 2022; 10:
1040077.

87.

Hirano Arruda Moraes L, Jornada Krebs VL, de Carvalho WB. Risk factors for acute
kidney injury in very-low birth weight newborns: a systematic review with meta-analysis.
Eur J Pediatr 2024; 183: 3243-3251.

88.

Jetton JG, Askenazi DJ. Acute kidney injury in the neonate. Clin Perinatol 2014; 41:
487-502.

89.

Lazarovits G, Ofek Shlomai N, Kheir R, et al. Acute Kidney Injury in Very Low Birth
Weight Infants: A Major Morbidity and Mortality Risk Factor. Children (Basel) 2023;
10: 242.

90.

Stoops C, Boohaker L, Sims B, et al. The Association of Intraventricular Hemorrhage
and Acute Kidney Injury in Premature Infants from the Assessment of the Worldwide
Acute Kidney Injury Epidemiology in Neonates (AWAKEN) Study. Neonatology 2019;
116: 321-330.

91.

Tai CW, Gibbons K, Schibler A, et al. Acute kidney injury: epidemiology and course in
critically ill children. J Nephrol 2022; 35: 559-565.
Wallace SW, Geers ER, Niehaus JZ, et al. Kidney complications in children with
bronchopulmonary dysplasia. Pediatr Res 2025; 97: 2431-2435.
Wildes DM, O'Reilly D, Brennan E, et al. Acute kidney injury in late-onset neonatal
bacteraemia: The role of the neonatal sequential organ failure assessment tool in
predicting kidney injury. BMJ Paediatr Open 2025; 9: e003336.

D

93.

R

92.

AF
T

85.

94.

Askenazi D, Abitbol C, Boohaker L, et al. Optimizing the AKI definition during first
postnatal week using Assessment of Worldwide Acute Kidney Injury Epidemiology in
Neonates (AWAKEN) cohort. Pediatr Res 2019; 85: 329-338.

95.

Thayyil S, Sheik S, Kempley ST, et al. A gestation- and postnatal age-based reference
chart for assessing renal function in extremely premature infants. J Perinatol 2008; 28:
226-229.

96.

Kuo J, Akison LK, Chatfield MD, et al. Serum and urinary biomarkers to predict acute
kidney injury in premature infants: a systematic review and meta-analysis of diagnostic
accuracy. J Nephrol 2022; 35: 2001-2014.
385

Mohamed T, Alexander R, Davidson B, et al. Urinary Neutrophil Gelatinase-Associated
Lipocalin Values in Preterm Neonates: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Am J
Perinatol 2025; 42: 683-688.

98.

Xu X, Nie S, Xu H, et al. Detecting Neonatal AKI by Serum Cystatin C. J Am Soc
Nephrol 2023; 34: 1253-1263.

99.

Evans R, Calice-Silva V, Raimann JG, et al. Diagnostic Performance of a Saliva Urea
Nitrogen Dipstick to Detect Kidney Disease in Malawi. Kidney Int Rep 2017; 2: 219-227.

100.

Cama-Olivares A, Braun C, Takeuchi T, et al. Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of
Machine Learning Models for Acute Kidney Injury Risk Classification. J Am Soc
Nephrol 2025; 36: 1969-1983.

101.

Birnie K, Verheyden V, Pagano D, et al. Predictive models for kidney disease: improving
global outcomes (KDIGO) defined acute kidney injury in UK cardiac surgery. Crit Care
2014; 18: 606.

102.

Jiang W, Xu J, Shen B, et al. Validation of Four Prediction Scores for Cardiac SurgeryAssociated Acute Kidney Injury in Chinese Patients. Braz J Cardiovasc Surg 2017; 32:
481-486.

103.

Kasim G.C., Adil A, Rum M, et al. Mehta tool as favorable scoring to predict the need
for renal replacement therapy in post-CABG patients. Crit Care Shock 2024; 27.

104.

Kim WH, Lee JH, Kim E, et al. Can We Really Predict Postoperative Acute Kidney
Injury after Aortic Surgery? Diagnostic Accuracy of Risk Scores Using Gray Zone
Approach. Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2016; 64: 281-289.

105.

Ohnuma T, Uchino S, Toki N, et al. External Validation for Acute Kidney Injury
Severity Scores: A Multicenter Retrospective Study in 14 Japanese ICUs. Am J Nephrol
2015; 42: 57-64.

D

R

AF
T

97.

106.

Zhang H, Yu M, Wang R, et al. Derivation and Validation a Risk Model for Acute
Kidney Injury and Subsequent Adverse Events After Cardiac Surgery: A Multicenter
Cohort Study. Int J Gen Med 2022; 15: 7751-7760.

107.

Li N, Wang J, Zhou W, et al. External Validation of the Simple Postoperative Acute
Kidney Injury Risk Index in Patients Admitted to the Intensive Care Unit After
Noncardiac Surgery. Anesth Analg 2025; 140: 1140-1148.

108.

Nishimoto M, Murashima M, Kokubu M, et al. External Validation of a Prediction
Model for Acute Kidney Injury Following Noncardiac Surgery. JAMA Netw Open 2021;
4: e2127362.
386

Park S, Cho H, Park S, et al. Simple Postoperative AKI Risk (SPARK) Classification
before Noncardiac Surgery: A Prediction Index Development Study with External
Validation. J Am Soc Nephrol 2019; 30: 170-181.

110.

Kashani K, Macedo E, Burdmann EA, et al. Acute Kidney Injury Risk Assessment:
Differences and Similarities Between Resource-Limited and Resource-Rich Countries.
Kidney Int Rep 2017; 2: 519-529.

111.

Flechet M, Guiza F, Schetz M, et al. AKIpredictor, an online prognostic calculator for
acute kidney injury in adult critically ill patients: development, validation and
comparison to serum neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin. Intensive Care Med
2017; 43: 764-773.

112.

Malhotra R, Kashani KB, Macedo E, et al. A risk prediction score for acute kidney injury
in the intensive care unit. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2017; 32: 814-822.

113.

Chawalitpongpun P, Kanchanasurakit S, Sanhatham N, et al. A clinical risk score for
predicting acute kidney injury in sepsis patients receiving normal saline in Northern
Thailand: a retrospective cohort study. Acute Crit Care 2024; 39: 369-378.

114.

Zhou J, Bai Y, Wang X, et al. A simple risk score for prediction of sepsis associatedacute kidney injury in critically ill patients. J Nephrol 2019; 32: 947-956.

115.

Sandokji I, Yamamoto Y, Biswas A, et al. A Time-Updated, Parsimonious Model to
Predict AKI in Hospitalized Children. J Am Soc Nephrol 2020; 31: 1348-1357.

R

AF
T

109.

Wang L, McGregor TL, Jones DP, et al. Electronic health record-based predictive models
for acute kidney injury screening in pediatric inpatients. Pediatr Res 2017; 82: 465-473.

117.

Dong J, Feng T, Thapa-Chhetry B, et al. Machine learning model for early prediction of
acute kidney injury (AKI) in pediatric critical care. Crit Care 2021; 25: 288.

D

116.

118.

Sanchez-Pinto LN, Khemani RG. Development of a Prediction Model of Early Acute
Kidney Injury in Critically Ill Children Using Electronic Health Record Data. Pediatr
Crit Care Med 2016; 17: 508-515.

119.

Nagy M, Onder AM, Rosen D, et al. Predicting pediatric cardiac surgery-associated acute
kidney injury using machine learning. Pediatr Nephrol 2024; 39: 1263-1270.

120.

Fang Y, Zheng W, Chen K, et al. Risk factors for predicting acute kidney injury in
children with septic shock: a retrospective cohort study. Pediatr Nephrol 2025; 40: 35633575.

387

Adhikari L, Ozrazgat-Baslanti T, Ruppert M, et al. Improved predictive models for acute
kidney injury with IDEA: Intraoperative Data Embedded Analytics. PLoS One 2019; 14:
e0214904.

122.

Demirjian S, Bashour CA, Shaw A, et al. Predictive Accuracy of a Perioperative
Laboratory Test-Based Prediction Model for Moderate to Severe Acute Kidney Injury
After Cardiac Surgery. JAMA 2022; 327: 956-964.

123.

Flechet M, Falini S, Bonetti C, et al. Machine learning versus physicians' prediction of
acute kidney injury in critically ill adults: a prospective evaluation of the AKIpredictor.
Crit Care 2019; 23: 282.

124.

Barbar SD, Clere-Jehl R, Bourredjem A, et al. Timing of Renal-Replacement Therapy in
Patients with Acute Kidney Injury and Sepsis. N Engl J Med 2018; 379: 1431-1442.

125.

Gaudry S, Hajage D, Martin-Lefevre L, et al. Comparison of two delayed strategies for
renal replacement therapy initiation for severe acute kidney injury (AKIKI 2): a
multicentre, open-label, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet 2021; 397: 1293-1300.

126.

Gaudry S, Hajage D, Schortgen F, et al. Initiation Strategies for Renal-Replacement
Therapy in the Intensive Care Unit. N Engl J Med 2016; 375: 122-133.

127.

Investigators S-A, Group CCCT, Group ANZICSCT, et al. Timing of Initiation of RenalReplacement Therapy in Acute Kidney Injury. N Engl J Med 2020; 383: 240-251.

128.

Zarbock A, Kellum JA, Schmidt C, et al. Effect of Early vs Delayed Initiation of Renal
Replacement Therapy on Mortality in Critically Ill Patients With Acute Kidney Injury:
The ELAIN Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2016; 315: 2190-2199.

R

AF
T

121.

Thakar CV, Arrigain S, Worley S, et al. A clinical score to predict acute renal failure
after cardiac surgery. J Am Soc Nephrol 2005; 16: 162-168.

D

129.

130.

Wijeysundera DN, Karkouti K, Dupuis JY, et al. Derivation and validation of a
simplified predictive index for renal replacement therapy after cardiac surgery. JAMA
2007; 297: 1801-1809.

131.

Zuo F, Zhong L, Min J, et al. Construction and validation of risk prediction models for
renal replacement therapy in patients with acute pancreatitis. Eur J Med Res 2025; 30:
70.

132.

Churpek MM, Carey KA, Edelson DP, et al. Internal and External Validation of a
Machine Learning Risk Score for Acute Kidney Injury. JAMA Netw Open 2020; 3:
e2012892.

388

Demirjian S, Chertow GM, Zhang JH, et al. Model to predict mortality in critically ill
adults with acute kidney injury. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2011; 6: 2114-2120.

134.

Englberger L, Suri RM, Li Z, et al. Validation of clinical scores predicting severe acute
kidney injury after cardiac surgery. Am J Kidney Dis 2010; 56: 623-631.

135.

Evans RDR, Sharma SK, Claure-Del Granado R, et al. Identification and outcomes of
acute kidney disease in patients presenting in Bolivia, Brazil, South Africa, and Nepal.
PLoS Med 2024; 21: e1004495.

136.

Koyner JL, Adhikari R, Edelson DP, et al. Development of a Multicenter Ward-Based
AKI Prediction Model. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2016; 11: 1935-1943.

137.

Koyner JL, Carey KA, Edelson DP, et al. The Development of a Machine Learning
Inpatient Acute Kidney Injury Prediction Model. Crit Care Med 2018; 46: 1070-1077.

138.

Mehta RH, Grab JD, O'Brien SM, et al. Bedside tool for predicting the risk of
postoperative dialysis in patients undergoing cardiac surgery. Circulation 2006; 114:
2208-2216; quiz 2208.

139.

Wilson TA, de Koning L, Quinn RR, et al. Derivation and External Validation of a Risk
Index for Predicting Acute Kidney Injury Requiring Kidney Replacement Therapy After
Noncardiac Surgery. JAMA Netw Open 2021; 4: e2121901.

140.

Harrison TG, Hemmelgarn BR, James MT, et al. Prediction of major postoperative
events after non-cardiac surgery for people with kidney failure: derivation and internal
validation of risk models. BMC Nephrol 2023; 24: 49.

R

AF
T

133.

Es-Saad O, Berrada M, Elhasnaoui A, et al. Predicting kidney replacement therapy in
critically ill patients: machine learning models versus clinician judgment. Renal
Replacement Therapy 2025; 11: 83.

D

141.

142.

Macedo E, Hemmila U, Sharma SK, et al. Recognition and management of communityacquired acute kidney injury in low-resource settings in the ISN 0by25 trial: A multicountry feasibility study. PLoS Med 2021; 18: e1003408.

143.

Evans RDR, Sharma SK, Claure-Del Granado R, et al. Management of acute kidney
disease as part of routine clinical care in low-resource settings: The International Society
of Nephrology Kidney Care Network Project. PLoS One 2025; 20: e0315802.

144.

Bell S, James MT, Farmer CKT, et al. Development and external validation of an acute
kidney injury risk score for use in the general population. Clin Kidney J 2020; 13: 402412.

389

Huang CY, Guiza F, De Vlieger G, et al. Development and validation of clinical
prediction models for acute kidney injury recovery at hospital discharge in critically ill
adults. J Clin Monit Comput 2023; 37: 113-125.

146.

Karway GK, Koyner JL, Caskey J, et al. Development and external validation of
multimodal postoperative acute kidney injury risk machine learning models. JAMIA
Open 2023; 6: ooad109.

147.

Lee HC, Yoon HK, Nam K, et al. Derivation and Validation of Machine Learning
Approaches to Predict Acute Kidney Injury after Cardiac Surgery. J Clin Med 2018; 7.

148.

Tomasev N, Glorot X, Rae JW, et al. A clinically applicable approach to continuous
prediction of future acute kidney injury. Nature 2019; 572: 116-119.

149.

Zhang H, Wang AY, Wu S, et al. Artificial intelligence for the prediction of acute kidney
injury during the perioperative period: systematic review and Meta-analysis of diagnostic
test accuracy. BMC Nephrol 2022; 23: 405.

150.

Quickfall D, La AM, Koyner JL. 10 tips on how to use dynamic risk assessment and
alerts for AKI. Clin Kidney J 2024; 17: sfae325.

151.

Altobaishat O, Abouzid M, Amin AM, et al. The effect of clinical decision support
systems on clinical outcomes in acute kidney injury: a systematic review and metaanalysis of randomized controlled trials. Ren Fail 2024; 46: 2400552.

152.

James MT, Dixon E, Tan Z, et al. Stepped-Wedge Trial of Decision Support for Acute
Kidney Injury on Surgical Units. Kidney Int Rep 2024; 9: 2996-3005.

R

AF
T

145.

James MT, Har BJ, Tyrrell BD, et al. Effect of Clinical Decision Support With Audit and
Feedback on Prevention of Acute Kidney Injury in Patients Undergoing Coronary
Angiography: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2022; 328: 839-849.

D

153.

154.

Kelly YP, Mistry K, Ahmed S, et al. Controlled Study of Decision-Making Algorithms
for Kidney Replacement Therapy Initiation in Acute Kidney Injury. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2022; 17: 194-204.

155.

Roggeveen LF, Guo T, Fleuren LM, et al. Right dose, right now: bedside, real-time, datadriven, and personalised antibiotic dosing in critically ill patients with sepsis or septic
shock-a two-centre randomised clinical trial. Crit Care 2022; 26: 265.

156.

Van Driest SL, Wang L, McLemore MF, et al. Acute kidney injury risk-based screening
in pediatric inpatients: a pragmatic randomized trial. Pediatr Res 2020; 87: 118-124.

157.

Ronco C, Bellomo R, Kellum J. Understanding renal functional reserve. Intensive Care
Med 2017; 43: 917-920.
390

Husain-Syed F, Ferrari F, Sharma A, et al. Preoperative Renal Functional Reserve
Predicts Risk of Acute Kidney Injury After Cardiac Operation. Ann Thorac Surg 2018;
105: 1094-1101.

159.

Mancianti N, Guarnieri A, Lenoci M, et al. Rationale for the evaluation of renal
functional reserve in allogeneic stem cell transplantation candidates: a pilot study. Clin
Kidney J 2023; 16: 996-1004.

160.

Dieguez S, Ayuso S, Brindo M, et al. Renal functional reserve evolution in children with
a previous episode of hemolytic uremic syndrome. Nephron Clin Pract 2004; 97: c118122.

161.

Chawla LS, Davison DL, Brasha-Mitchell E, et al. Development and standardization of a
furosemide stress test to predict the severity of acute kidney injury. Crit Care 2013; 17:
R207.

162.

Dyvik S, Toteja N, Mittal A, et al. Diagnostic Accuracy of Furosemide Stress Test and
Cystatin-C for Predicting Acute Kidney Injury Progression in Children: A Prospective
Cohort Study. Indian J Pediatr 2025; 92: 625-631.

163.

Gist KM, Penk J, Wald EL, et al. Urine Quantification Following Furosemide for Severe
Acute Kidney Injury Prediction in Critically Ill Children. J Pediatr Intensive Care 2023;
12: 289-295.

164.

Krishnasamy S, Sinha A, Lodha R, et al. Furosemide stress test to predict acute kidney
injury progression in critically ill children. Pediatr Nephrol 2025; 40: 243-251.

R

AF
T

158.

Penk J, Gist KM, Wald EL, et al. Furosemide response predicts acute kidney injury in
children after cardiac surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2019; 157: 2444-2451.

166.

Goldstein SL, Krallman KA, Roy JP, et al. Real-Time Acute Kidney Injury Risk
Stratification-Biomarker Directed Fluid Management Improves Outcomes in Critically Ill
Children and Young Adults. Kidney Int Rep 2023; 8: 2690-2700.

167.

Koyner JL, Davison DL, Brasha-Mitchell E, et al. Furosemide Stress Test and
Biomarkers for the Prediction of AKI Severity. J Am Soc Nephrol 2015; 26: 2023-2031.

168.

Matsuura R, Komaru Y, Miyamoto Y, et al. Response to different furosemide doses
predicts AKI progression in ICU patients with elevated plasma NGAL levels. Ann
Intensive Care 2018; 8: 8.

169.

Chen JJ, Chang CH, Huang YT, et al. Furosemide stress test as a predictive marker of
acute kidney injury progression or renal replacement therapy: a systemic review and
meta-analysis. Crit Care 2020; 24: 202.

D

165.

391

Das PK, Maurya SK, Nath SS, et al. Furosemide Stress Test and Renal Resistive Index
for Prediction of Severity of Acute Kidney Injury in Sepsis. Cureus 2023; 15: e44408.

171.

Meersch M, Weiss R, Gerss J, et al. Predicting the Development of Renal Replacement
Therapy Indications by Combining the Furosemide Stress Test and Chemokine (C-C
Motif) Ligand 14 in a Cohort of Postsurgical Patients. Crit Care Med 2023; 51: 10331042.

172.

Palmowski L, Lindau S, Henk LC, et al. Predictive enrichment for the need of renal
replacement in sepsis-associated acute kidney injury: combination of furosemide stress
test and urinary biomarkers TIMP-2 and IGFBP-7. Ann Intensive Care 2024; 14: 111.

173.

Su Y, Liu WJ, Zhao YF, et al. Modified furosemide responsiveness index and biomarkers
for AKI progression and prognosis: a prospective observational study. Ann Intensive
Care 2024; 14: 156.

174.

Su Y, Zhang YJ, Tu GW, et al. Furosemide Responsiveness Predicts Acute Kidney
Injury Progression After Cardiac Surgery. Ann Thorac Surg 2024; 117: 432-438.

175.

Zhang K, Zhang H, Zhao C, et al. The furosemide stress test predicts the timing of
continuous renal replacement therapy initiation in critically ill patients with acute kidney
injury: a double-blind prospective intervention cohort study. Eur J Med Res 2023; 28:
149.

176.

Blinder JJ, Alten J, Bailly D, et al. Diuretic response after neonatal cardiac surgery: a
report from the NEPHRON collaborative. Pediatr Nephrol 2024; 39: 2797-2805.

R

AF
T

170.

Borasino S, Wall KM, Crawford JH, et al. Furosemide Response Predicts Acute Kidney
Injury After Cardiac Surgery in Infants and Neonates. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2018; 19:
310-317.

D

177.

178.

Kakajiwala A, Kim JY, Hughes JZ, et al. Lack of Furosemide Responsiveness Predicts
Acute Kidney Injury in Infants After Cardiac Surgery. Ann Thorac Surg 2017; 104:
1388-1394.

179.

Sullivan E, Melink K, Pettit K, et al. Prediction of cardiac surgery associated acute
kidney injury using response to loop diuretic and urine neutrophil gelatinase associated
lipocalin. Pediatr Nephrol 2024; 39: 3597-3606.

180.

Lumlertgul N, Peerapornratana S, Trakarnvanich T, et al. Early versus standard initiation
of renal replacement therapy in furosemide stress test non-responsive acute kidney injury
patients (the FST trial). Crit Care 2018; 22: 101.

392

Rewa OG, Bagshaw SM, Wang X, et al. The furosemide stress test for prediction of
worsening acute kidney injury in critically ill patients: A multicenter, prospective,
observational study. J Crit Care 2019; 52: 109-114.

182.

Chen S. Retooling the creatinine clearance equation to estimate kinetic GFR when the
plasma creatinine is changing acutely. J Am Soc Nephrol 2013; 24: 877-888.

183.

Christiadi D, Erlich J, Levy M, et al. The kinetic estimated glomerular filtration rate ratio
predicts acute kidney injury. Nephrology (Carlton) 2021; 26: 782-789.

184.

Dewitte A, Joannes-Boyau O, Sidobre C, et al. Kinetic eGFR and Novel AKI Biomarkers
to Predict Renal Recovery. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2015; 10: 1900-1910.

185.

O'Sullivan ED, Doyle A. The clinical utility of kinetic glomerular filtration rate. Clin
Kidney J 2017; 10: 202-208.

186.

Lijovic L, Pelajic S, Hawchar F, et al. Diagnosing acute kidney injury ahead of time in
critically ill septic patients using kinetic estimated glomerular filtration rate. J Crit Care
2023; 75: 154276.

187.

Dash J, Verissimo T, Faivre A, et al. Kinetic GFR Outperforms CKD-EPI for Slow Graft
Function Prediction in the Immediate Postoperative Period Following Kidney
Transplantation. J Clin Med 2020; 9: 4003.

188.

Dumnicka P, Mazur-Laskowska M, Ceranowicz P, et al. Acute Changes in Serum
Creatinine and Kinetic Glomerular Filtration Rate Estimation in Early Phase of Acute
Pancreatitis. J Clin Med 2022; 11: 6159.

R

AF
T

181.

Seelhammer TG, Maile MD, Heung M, et al. Kinetic estimated glomerular filtration rate
and acute kidney injury in cardiac surgery patients. J Crit Care 2016; 31: 249-254.

190.

Chen S. Kinetic Glomerular Filtration Rate in Routine Clinical Practice-Applications and
Possibilities. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis 2018; 25: 105-114.

191.

Grams ME, Astor BC, Bash LD, et al. Albuminuria and estimated glomerular filtration
rate independently associate with acute kidney injury. J Am Soc Nephrol 2010; 21: 17571764.

192.

James MT, Hemmelgarn BR, Wiebe N, et al. Glomerular filtration rate, proteinuria, and
the incidence and consequences of acute kidney injury: a cohort study. Lancet 2010; 376:
2096-2103.

193.

Hsu C-y, Chinchilli VM, Coca S, et al. Post–Acute Kidney Injury Proteinuria and
Subsequent Kidney Disease Progression: The Assessment, Serial Evaluation, and

D

189.

393

Subsequent Sequelae in Acute Kidney Injury (ASSESS-AKI) Study. JAMA Internal
Medicine 2020; 180: 402-410.
James MT, Grams ME, Woodward M, et al. A Meta-analysis of the Association of
Estimated GFR, Albuminuria, Diabetes Mellitus, and Hypertension With Acute Kidney
Injury. Am J Kidney Dis 2015; 66: 602-612.

195.

Tao Y, Dong W, Li Z, et al. Proteinuria as an independent risk factor for contrast-induced
acute kidney injury and mortality in patients with stroke undergoing cerebral
angiography. J Neurointerv Surg 2017; 9: 445-448.

196.

Neyra JA, Manllo J, Li X, et al. Association of de novo dipstick albuminuria with severe
acute kidney injury in critically ill septic patients. Nephron Clin Pract 2014; 128: 373380.

197.

Huang F, Zeng Y, Lv L, et al. Predictive value of urinary cell cycle arrest biomarkers for
all cause-acute kidney injury: a meta-analysis. Sci Rep 2023; 13: 6037.

198.

Molnar AO, Parikh CR, Sint K, et al. Association of postoperative proteinuria with AKI
after cardiac surgery among patients at high risk. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2012; 7: 17491760.

199.

George LK, Molnar MZ, Lu JL, et al. Association of Pre-Operative Albuminuria with
Post-Operative Outcomes after Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting. Sci Rep 2015; 5:
16458.

200.

Jiang W, Chen Z, Xu J, et al. Proteinuria is a risk factor for acute kidney injury after
cardiac surgery in patients with stages 3–4 chronic kidney disease: a case control study.
BMC Cardiovascular Disorders 2023; 23: 77.

201.

Wahl TS, Graham LA, Morris MS, et al. Association Between Preoperative Proteinuria
and Postoperative Acute Kidney Injury and Readmission. JAMA Surg 2018; 153:
e182009.

D

R

AF
T

194.

202.

Nishimoto M, Murashima M, Kokubu M, et al. Pre-operative proteinuria and postoperative acute kidney injury in noncardiac surgery: the NARA-Acute Kidney Injury
cohort study. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2020; 35: 2111-2116.

203.

Hsu CY, Ordonez JD, Chertow GM, et al. The risk of acute renal failure in patients with
chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int 2008; 74: 101-107.

204.

Huang TM, Wu VC, Young GH, et al. Preoperative proteinuria predicts adverse renal
outcomes after coronary artery bypass grafting. J Am Soc Nephrol 2011; 22: 156-163.

394

Lee BJ, Go AS, Parikh R, et al. Pre-admission proteinuria impacts risk of non-recovery
after dialysis-requiring acute kidney injury. Kidney Int 2018; 93: 968-976.

206.

Parr SK, Matheny ME, Abdel-Kader K, et al. Acute kidney injury is a risk factor for
subsequent proteinuria. Kidney Int 2018; 93: 460-469.

207.

Hsu CY, Chinchilli VM, Coca S, et al. Post-Acute Kidney Injury Proteinuria and
Subsequent Kidney Disease Progression: The Assessment, Serial Evaluation, and
Subsequent Sequelae in Acute Kidney Injury (ASSESS-AKI) Study. JAMA Intern Med
2020; 180: 402-410.

208.

Jiang W, Chen Z, Xu J, et al. Proteinuria is a risk factor for acute kidney injury after
cardiac surgery in patients with stages 3-4 chronic kidney disease: a case control study.
BMC Cardiovasc Disord 2023; 23: 77.

209.

Haase M, Bellomo R, Devarajan P, et al. Accuracy of neutrophil gelatinase-associated
lipocalin (NGAL) in diagnosis and prognosis in acute kidney injury: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Am J Kidney Dis 2009; 54: 1012-1024.

210.

Ho J, Tangri N, Komenda P, et al. Urinary, Plasma, and Serum Biomarkers' Utility for
Predicting Acute Kidney Injury Associated With Cardiac Surgery in Adults: A Metaanalysis. Am J Kidney Dis 2015; 66: 993-1005.

211.

Kashani K, Al-Khafaji A, Ardiles T, et al. Discovery and validation of cell cycle arrest
biomarkers in human acute kidney injury. Crit Care 2013; 17: R25.

212.

Lin LC, Chuan MH, Liu JH, et al. Proenkephalin as a biomarker correlates with acute
kidney injury: a systematic review with meta-analysis and trial sequential analysis. Crit
Care 2023; 27: 481.

213.

Boonstra J, Post JA. Molecular events associated with reactive oxygen species and cell
cycle progression in mammalian cells. Gene 2004; 337: 1-13.

D

R

AF
T

205.

214.

Kellum JA, Chawla LS. Cell-cycle arrest and acute kidney injury: the light and the dark
sides. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2016; 31: 16-22.

215.

Price PM, Safirstein RL, Megyesi J. The cell cycle and acute kidney injury. Kidney Int
2009; 76: 604-613.

216.

Seo DW, Li H, Qu CK, et al. Shp-1 mediates the antiproliferative activity of tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase-2 in human microvascular endothelial cells. J Biol Chem
2006; 281: 3711-3721.

217.

von Groote T, Meersch M, Romagnoli S, et al. Biomarker-guided intervention to prevent
acute kidney injury after major surgery (BigpAK-2 trial): study protocol for an
395

international, prospective, randomised controlled multicentre trial. BMJ Open 2023; 13:
e070240.
Pan HC, Yang SY, Chiou TT, et al. Comparative accuracy of biomarkers for the
prediction of hospital-acquired acute kidney injury: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Crit Care 2022; 26: 349.

219.

Cai L, Rubin J, Han W, et al. The origin of multiple molecular forms in urine of
HNL/NGAL. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2010; 5: 2229-2235.

220.

Cote JM, Lyons L, Twomey PJ, et al. Clinical Implementation and Initial Experience of
Neutrophil Gelatinase-Associated Lipocalin Testing for the Diagnostic and Prognostic
Assessment of Acute Kidney Injury Events in Hospitalized Patients. Nephron 2022; 146:
306-314.

221.

Basu RK, Wong HR, Krawczeski CD, et al. Combining functional and tubular damage
biomarkers improves diagnostic precision for acute kidney injury after cardiac surgery. J
Am Coll Cardiol 2014; 64: 2753-2762.

222.

Brazzelli M, Aucott L, Aceves-Martins M, et al. Biomarkers for assessing acute kidney
injury for people who are being considered for admission to critical care: a systematic
review and cost-effectiveness analysis. Health Technol Assess 2022; 26: 1-286.

223.

Milne B, Helyar S, Pellowe C, et al. Adoption of a novel biomarker-guided quality
improvement treatment bundle for patients with subclinical acute kidney injury after
cardiac surgery: An implementation study. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2025. doi:
10.1097/EJA.0000000000002315.

R

AF
T

218.

Li N, Zhou WJ, Chi DX, et al. Association between urine microscopy and severe acute
kidney injury in critically ill patients following non-cardiac surgery: a prospective cohort
study. Ann Palliat Med 2022; 11: 2327-2337.

D

224.

225.

Varghese V, Rivera MS, Alalwan A, et al. Concomitant Identification of Muddy Brown
Granular Casts and Low Fractional Excretion of Urinary Sodium in AKI. Kidney360
2022; 3: 627-635.

226.

Muriithi AK, Nasr SH, Leung N. Utility of urine eosinophils in the diagnosis of acute
interstitial nephritis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2013; 8: 1857-1862.

227.

Claure-Del Granado R, Torrico-Moreira D, Zhang J, et al. The Utility of Urine
Microscopy Score for Early Detection and Prediction of Acute Kidney Injury in At-Risk
Patients. Kidney360 2025; 6: 1873-1879.

228.

Perazella MA, Coca SG, Kanbay M, et al. Diagnostic value of urine microscopy for
differential diagnosis of acute kidney injury in hospitalized patients. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2008; 3: 1615-1619.
396

Perazella MA. The urine sediment as a biomarker of kidney disease. Am J Kidney Dis
2015; 66: 748-755.

230.

Cavanaugh C, Perazella MA. Urine Sediment Examination in the Diagnosis and
Management of Kidney Disease: Core Curriculum 2019. Am J Kidney Dis 2019; 73: 258272.

231.

Palsson R, Colona MR, Hoenig MP, et al. Assessment of Interobserver Reliability of
Nephrologist Examination of Urine Sediment. JAMA Netw Open 2020; 3: e2013959.

232.

Claure-Del Granado R, Macedo E, Mehta RL. Urine microscopy in acute kidney injury:
time for a change. Am J Kidney Dis 2011; 57: 657-660.

233.

Michel DM, Kelly CJ. Acute interstitial nephritis. J Am Soc Nephrol 1998; 9: 506-515.

234.

Baker RJ, Pusey CD. The changing profile of acute tubulointerstitial nephritis. Nephrol
Dial Transplant 2004; 19: 8-11.

235.

Muriithi AK, Leung N, Valeri AM, et al. Biopsy-proven acute interstitial nephritis, 19932011: a case series. Am J Kidney Dis 2014; 64: 558-566.

236.

Mohan A, Krisanapan P, Tangpanithandee S, et al. Association of Proton Pump Inhibitor
Use and Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor-Mediated Acute Kidney Injury: A Meta-Analysis
and a Review of Related Outcomes. Am J Nephrol 2024; 55: 439-449.

237.

Corwin HL, Korbet SM, Schwartz MM. Clinical correlates of eosinophiluria. Arch Intern
Med 1985; 145: 1097-1099.

238.

Cortazar FB, Kibbelaar ZA, Glezerman IG, et al. Clinical Features and Outcomes of
Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor-Associated AKI: A Multicenter Study. J Am Soc Nephrol
2020; 31: 435-446.

D

R

AF
T

229.

239.

Moledina DG, Wilson FP, Pober JS, et al. Urine TNF-alpha and IL-9 for clinical
diagnosis of acute interstitial nephritis. JCI Insight 2019; 4: e127456.

240.

Moledina DG, Parikh CR. Differentiating Acute Interstitial Nephritis from Acute Tubular
Injury: A Challenge for Clinicians. Nephron 2019; 143: 211-216.

241.

Moledina DG, Obeid W, Smith RN, et al. Identification and validation of urinary CXCL9
as a biomarker for diagnosis of acute interstitial nephritis. J Clin Invest 2023; 133:
e168950.

397

Moledina DG, Wilson FP, Kukova L, et al. Urine interleukin-9 and tumor necrosis
factor-alpha for prognosis of human acute interstitial nephritis. Nephrol Dial Transplant
2021; 36: 1851-1858.

243.

Farooqui N, Zaidi M, Vaughan L, et al. Cytokines and Immune Cell Phenotype in Acute
Kidney Injury Associated With Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors. Kidney Int Rep 2023; 8:
628-641.

244.

Martinez Valenzuela L, Draibe J, Bestard O, et al. Urinary Cytokines Reflect Renal
Inflammation in Acute Tubulointerstitial Nephritis: A Multiplex Bead-Based Assay
Assessment. J Clin Med 2021; 10: 2986.

245.

Pepin MN, Bouchard J, Legault L, et al. Diagnostic performance of fractional excretion
of urea and fractional excretion of sodium in the evaluations of patients with acute kidney
injury with or without diuretic treatment. Am J Kidney Dis 2007; 50: 566-573.

246.

Belcher JM, Garcia-Tsao G, Sanyal AJ, et al. Urinary biomarkers and progression of AKI
in patients with cirrhosis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2014; 9: 1857-1867.

247.

Abdelhafez M, Nayfeh T, Atieh A, et al. Diagnostic Performance of Fractional Excretion
of Sodium for the Differential Diagnosis of Acute Kidney Injury: A Systematic Review
and Meta-Analysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2022; 17: 785-797.

248.

Kaplan AA, Kohn OF. Fractional excretion of urea as a guide to renal dysfunction. Am J
Nephrol 1992; 12: 49-54.

249.

Koyner JL, Vaidya VS, Bennett MR, et al. Urinary biomarkers in the clinical prognosis
and early detection of acute kidney injury. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2010; 5: 2154-2165.

250.

Legrand M, Le Cam B, Perbet S, et al. Urine sodium concentration to predict fluid
responsiveness in oliguric ICU patients: a prospective multicenter observational study.
Crit Care 2016; 20: 165.

D

R

AF
T

242.

251.

Ugwuowo U, Yamamoto Y, Arora T, et al. Real-Time Prediction of Acute Kidney Injury
in Hospitalized Adults: Implementation and Proof of Concept. Am J Kidney Dis 2020;
76: 806-814 e801.

252.

Nadim MK, Kellum JA, Forni L, et al. Acute kidney injury in patients with cirrhosis:
Acute Disease Quality Initiative (ADQI) and International Club of Ascites (ICA) joint
multidisciplinary consensus meeting. J Hepatol 2024; 81: 163-183.

253.

Belcher JM. Hepatorenal Syndrome Type 1: Diagnosis and Treatment. Adv Kidney Dis
Health 2024; 31: 100-110.

398

Angeli P, Gines P, Wong F, et al. Diagnosis and management of acute kidney injury in
patients with cirrhosis: revised consensus recommendations of the International Club of
Ascites. J Hepatol 2015; 62: 968-974.

255.

Wong F, O'Leary JG, Reddy KR, et al. Acute Kidney Injury in Cirrhosis: Baseline Serum
Creatinine Predicts Patient Outcomes. Am J Gastroenterol 2017; 112: 1103-1110.

256.

Gowda YHS, Jagtap N, Karyampudi A, et al. Fractional Excretion of Sodium and Urea in
Differentiating Acute Kidney Injury Phenotypes in Decompensated Cirrhosis. J Clin Exp
Hepatol 2022; 12: 899-907.

257.

Patidar KR, Kang L, Bajaj JS, et al. Fractional excretion of urea: A simple tool for the
differential diagnosis of acute kidney injury in cirrhosis. Hepatology 2018; 68: 224-233.

258.

Angeli P, Gines P, Wong F, et al. Diagnosis and management of acute kidney injury in
patients with cirrhosis: revised consensus recommendations of the International Club of
Ascites. Gut 2015; 64: 531-537.

259.

Belcher JM, Sanyal AJ, Peixoto AJ, et al. Kidney biomarkers and differential diagnosis
of patients with cirrhosis and acute kidney injury. Hepatology 2014; 60: 622-632.

260.

Allegretti AS, Parada XV, Endres P, et al. Urinary NGAL as a Diagnostic and Prognostic
Marker for Acute Kidney Injury in Cirrhosis: A Prospective Study. Clin Transl
Gastroenterol 2021; 12: e00359.

261.

Agrawal N, Louis-Jean S, Ladiwala Z, et al. Reliability of neutrophil gelatinaseassociated lipocalin in detecting acute tubular necrosis in decompensated cirrhosis:
Systematic review and meta-analysis. World J Hepatol 2024; 16: 1331-1338.

R

AF
T

254.

Devarajan P. Pediatric Acute Kidney Injury: Different From Acute Renal Failure But
How And Why. Curr Pediatr Rep 2013; 1: 34-40.

D

262.

263.

Haas M, Spargo BH, Wit EJ, et al. Etiologies and outcome of acute renal insufficiency in
older adults: a renal biopsy study of 259 cases. Am J Kidney Dis 2000; 35: 433-447.

264.

Kim H, Jo SK, Ahn SY, et al. Long-term Renal Outcome of Biopsy-proven Acute
Tubular Necrosis and Acute Interstitial Nephritis. J Korean Med Sci 2020; 35: e206.

265.

Sujatha S, Ramprasad K. Biopsy series of acute kidney injury from a tertiary care referral
center in south India. J Nephropharmacol 2015; 4: 43-45.

266.

Wen Y, Yang C, Menez SP, et al. A Systematic Review of Clinical Characteristics and
Histologic Descriptions of Acute Tubular Injury. Kidney Int Rep 2020; 5: 1993-2001.

399

Kudose S, Batal I, Santoriello D, et al. Kidney Biopsy Findings in Patients with COVID19. J Am Soc Nephrol 2020; 31: 1959-1968.

268.

Rossi GM, Delsante M, Pilato FP, et al. Kidney Biopsy Findings in a Critically Ill
COVID-19 Patient With Dialysis-Dependent Acute Kidney Injury: A Case Against
"SARS-CoV-2 Nephropathy". Kidney Int Rep 2020; 5: 1100-1105.

269.

de Boer IH, Alpers CE, Azeloglu EU, et al. Rationale and design of the Kidney Precision
Medicine Project. Kidney Int 2021; 99: 498-510.

270.

Waikar SS, McMahon GM. Expanding the Role for Kidney Biopsies in Acute Kidney
Injury. Semin Nephrol 2018; 38: 12-20.

271.

Rashidi A, Shah C, Sekulic M. The Role of Kidney Biopsy in Immune Checkpoint
Inhibitor-Associated AKI. Kidney360 2022; 3: 530-533.

272.

Poggio ED, McClelland RL, Blank KN, et al. Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of
Native Kidney Biopsy Complications. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2020; 15: 1595-1602.

273.

Augusto JF, Lassalle V, Fillatre P, et al. Safety and diagnostic yield of renal biopsy in the
intensive care unit. Intensive Care Med 2012; 38: 1826-1833.

274.

Corradi F, Bell M, De Rosa S. Kidney Doppler ultrasonography in critical care
nephrology. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2024; 39: 1416-1425.

275.

McDonald R, Watchorn J, Hutchings S. New ultrasound techniques for acute kidney
injury diagnostics. Curr Opin Crit Care 2024; 30: 571-576.

R

AF
T

267.

Wei Q, Zhu Y, Zhen W, et al. Performance of resistive index and semi-quantitative
power doppler ultrasound score in predicting acute kidney injury: A meta-analysis of
prospective studies. PLoS One 2022; 17: e0270623.

D

276.

277.

De Souza FM, De Carvalho AV, Ferraz IS, et al. Acute kidney injury in children
undergoing cardiac surgery: predictive value of kidney arterial Doppler-based variables.
Pediatr Nephrol 2024; 39: 2235-2243.

278.

Shen H, Na W, Li Y, et al. The clinical significance of renal resistance index (RRI) and
renal oxygen saturation (RrSO2) in critically ill children with AKI: a prospective cohort
study. BMC Pediatr 2023; 23: 224.

279.

de Carvalho AV, Ferraz IS, de Souza FM, et al. Acute kidney injury in critically ill
children: predictive value of renal arterial Doppler assessment. Pediatr Res 2023; 93:
1694-1700.

400

Varanasi P, Bhasin-Chhabra B, Koratala A. Point-of-care ultrasonography in acute
kidney injury. Journal of Translational Critical Care Medicine 2024; 6: e24-00005.

281.

Premkumar M, Karvellas CJ, Kulkarni AV, et al. Role of point-of-care ultrasound
(POCUS) in clinical hepatology. Hepatology 2024. doi:
10.1097/HEP.0000000000000990.

282.

Robinson CH, Iyengar A, Zappitelli M. Early recognition and prevention of acute kidney
injury in hospitalised children. Lancet Child Adolesc Health 2023; 7: 657-670.

283.

Akcan-Arikan A, Zappitelli M, Loftis LL, et al. Modified RIFLE criteria in critically ill
children with acute kidney injury. Kidney Int 2007; 71: 1028-1035.

284.

Hui-Stickle S, Brewer ED, Goldstein SL. Pediatric ARF epidemiology at a tertiary care
center from 1999 to 2001. Am J Kidney Dis 2005; 45: 96-101.

285.

Weidemann DK, Orr CJ, Norwood V, et al. Child Health Needs and the Pediatric
Nephrology Subspecialty Workforce: 2020-2040. Pediatrics 2024; 153: e2023063678P..

286.

Primack WA, Meyers KE, Kirkwood SJ, et al. The US pediatric nephrology workforce: a
report commissioned by the American Academy of Pediatrics. Am J Kidney Dis 2015;
66: 33-39.

287.

Selewski DT, Askenazi DJ, Kashani K, et al. Quality improvement goals for pediatric
acute kidney injury: pediatric applications of the 22nd Acute Disease Quality Initiative
(ADQI) conference. Pediatr Nephrol 2021; 36: 733-746.

R

AF
T

280.

Starr MC, Harer MW, Steflik HJ, et al. Kidney Health Monitoring in Neonatal Intensive
Care Unit Graduates: A Modified Delphi Consensus Statement. JAMA Netw Open 2024;
7: e2435043.

289.

Basu RK, Zappitelli M, Brunner L, et al. Derivation and validation of the renal angina
index to improve the prediction of acute kidney injury in critically ill children. Kidney Int
2014; 85: 659-667.

290.

Abbasi A, Mehdipour Rabori P, Farajollahi R, et al. Discriminatory Precision of Renal
Angina Index in Predicting Acute Kidney Injury in Children; a Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis. Arch Acad Emerg Med 2020; 8: e39.

291.

Alves MTB, Iglesias SBO, Koch Nogueira PC. Renal angina index for early
identification of risk of acute kidney injury in critically ill children. Pediatr Nephrol
2024; 39: 1245-1251.

292.

Goldstein SL, Krallman KA, Kirby C, et al. Integration of the Renal Angina Index and
Urine Neutrophil Gelatinase-Associated Lipocalin Improves Severe Acute Kidney Injury

D

288.

401

Prediction in Critically Ill Children and Young Adults. Kidney Int Rep 2022; 7: 18421849.
Huang L, Shi T, Quan W, et al. Assessment of early renal angina index for prediction of
subsequent severe acute kidney injury during septic shock in children. BMC Nephrol
2020; 21: 358.

294.

McGalliard RJ, McWilliam SJ, Maguire S, et al. Identifying critically ill children at high
risk of acute kidney injury and renal replacement therapy. PLoS One 2020; 15:
e0240360.

295.

Raman S, Tai CW, Le Marsney R, et al. Prediction of Acute Kidney Injury on Admission
to Pediatric Intensive Care. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2020; 21: 811-819.

296.

Ribeiro-Mourao F, Vaz AC, Azevedo A, et al. Assessment of the renal angina index for
the prediction of acute kidney injury in patients admitted to a European pediatric
intensive care unit. Pediatr Nephrol 2021; 36: 3993-4001.

297.

Singh T, Mahajan V, Kaur J, et al. Early diagnosis of kidney injury in a paediatric
population: a prospective cohort study (E-DRIP STUDY). Pediatr Nephrol 2022; 37:
2771-2779.

298.

Soliman ASA, Al-Ghamdi HS, Abukhatwah MW, et al. Renal angina index in critically
ill children as an applicable and reliable tool in the prediction of severe acute kidney
injury: Two tertiary centers' prospective observational study from the Middle East.
Medicine (Baltimore) 2023; 102: e36713.

R

AF
T

293.

Stanski NL, Basu RK, Cvijanovich NZ, et al. External validation of the modified sepsis
renal angina index for prediction of severe acute kidney injury in children with septic
shock. Crit Care 2023; 27: 463.

300.

Stanski NL, Krallman KA, Chima RS, et al. A risk-stratified assessment of biomarkerbased acute kidney injury phenotypes in children. Pediatr Res 2023; 93: 1354-1360.

301.

Stanski NL, Wong HR, Basu RK, et al. Recalibration of the Renal Angina Index for
Pediatric Septic Shock. Kidney Int Rep 2021; 6: 1858-1867.

302.

Suarez MDP, Fernandez-Sarmiento J, Gonzalez LE, et al. Evaluation of the Renal
Angina Index to Predict the Development of Acute Kidney Injury in Children With
Sepsis Who Live in Middle-Income Countries. Pediatr Emerg Care 2024; 40: 208-213.

303.

Sunya N, Gupta S, Saha A. Integration of Urinary Neutrophil Gelatinase-associated
Lipocalin with the Renal Angina Index to Predict Subsequent Severe Acute Kidney
Injury in Critically Ill Children: A Diagnostic Accuracy Study. Saudi J Kidney Dis
Transpl 2023; 34: S79-S85.

D

299.

402

Yaradilmis RM, Ozturk B, Gungor A, et al. Success of the acute renal angina index in the
early prediction of acute kidney injury in the emergency department. Acta Clin Belg
2023; 78: 51-57.

305.

Zulu C, Mwaba C, Wa Somwe S. The renal angina index accurately predicts low risk of
developing severe acute kidney injury among children admitted to a low-resource
pediatric intensive care unit. Ren Fail 2023; 45: 2252095.

306.

Liu C, Mao Z, Hu P, et al. Fluid resuscitation in critically ill patients: a systematic review
and network meta-analysis. Ther Clin Risk Manag 2018; 14: 1701-1709.

307.

Moeller C, Fleischmann C, Thomas-Rueddel D, et al. How safe is gelatin? A systematic
review and meta-analysis of gelatin-containing plasma expanders vs crystalloids and
albumin. J Crit Care 2016; 35: 75-83.

308.

Myburgh JA, Finfer S, Bellomo R, et al. Hydroxyethyl starch or saline for fluid
resuscitation in intensive care. N Engl J Med 2012; 367: 1901-1911.

309.

Perner A, Haase N, Guttormsen AB, et al. Hydroxyethyl starch 130/0.42 versus Ringer's
acetate in severe sepsis. N Engl J Med 2012; 367: 124-134.

310.

Tseng CH, Chen TT, Wu MY, et al. Resuscitation fluid types in sepsis, surgical, and
trauma patients: a systematic review and sequential network meta-analyses. Crit Care
2020; 24: 693.

311.

Lee KS, Kim JE, Kang G, et al. The effect of human albumin administration on
postoperative renal function following major surgery: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Sci Rep 2024; 14: 16599.

312.

Boutros AR, Ruess R, Olson L, et al. Comparison of hemodynamic, pulmonary, and
renal effects of use of three types of fluids after major surgical procedures on the
abdominal aorta. Crit Care Med 1979; 7: 9-13.

D

R

AF
T

304.

313.

Gondos T, Marjanek Z, Ulakcsai Z, et al. Short-term effectiveness of different volume
replacement therapies in postoperative hypovolaemic patients. Eur J Anaesthesiol 2010;
27: 794-800.

314.

Shires GT, 3rd, Peitzman AB, Albert SA, et al. Response of extravascular lung water to
intraoperative fluids. Ann Surg 1983; 197: 515-519.

315.

Virgilio RW, Rice CL, Smith DE, et al. Crystalloid vs. colloid resuscitation: is one
better? A randomized clinical study. Surgery 1979; 85: 129-139.

403

Zetterstrom H. Albumin treatment following major surgery. II. Effects on postoperative
lung function and circulatory adaptation. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 1981; 25: 133-141.

317.

Lewis SR, Pritchard MW, Evans DJ, et al. Colloids versus crystalloids for fluid
resuscitation in critically ill people. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018; 8: CD000567.

318.

Sankar J, Das RR, Banothu KK. Fluid resuscitation in children with severe infection and
septic shock: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Pediatr 2024; 183: 39253932.

319.

Upadhyay M, Singhi S, Murlidharan J, et al. Randomized evaluation of fluid
resuscitation with crystalloid (saline) and colloid (polymer from degraded gelatin in
saline) in pediatric septic shock. Indian Pediatr 2005; 42: 223-231.

320.

Brunkhorst FM, Engel C, Bloos F, et al. Intensive insulin therapy and pentastarch
resuscitation in severe sepsis. N Engl J Med 2008; 358: 125-139.

321.

Callum J, Skubas NJ, Bathla A, et al. Use of Intravenous Albumin: A Guideline From the
International Collaboration for Transfusion Medicine Guidelines. Chest 2024; 166: 321338.

322.

Biggins SW, Angeli P, Garcia-Tsao G, et al. Diagnosis, Evaluation, and Management of
Ascites, Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis and Hepatorenal Syndrome: 2021 Practice
Guidance by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. Hepatology
2021; 74: 1014-1048.

323.

Weiss SL, Peters MJ, Alhazzani W, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign International
Guidelines for the Management of Septic Shock and Sepsis-Associated Organ
Dysfunction in Children. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2020; 21: e52-e106.

324.

Chowdhury AH, Cox EF, Francis ST, et al. A randomized, controlled, double-blind
crossover study on the effects of 2-L infusions of 0.9% saline and plasma-lyte(R) 148 on
renal blood flow velocity and renal cortical tissue perfusion in healthy volunteers. Ann
Surg 2012; 256: 18-24.

D

R

AF
T

316.

325.

Wilcox CS. Regulation of renal blood flow by plasma chloride. J Clin Invest 1983; 71:
726-735.

326.

Aditianingsih D, Djaja AS, George YWH. The effect of balanced electrolyte solution
versus normal saline in the prevention of hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis in diabetic
ketoacidosis patients: a randomized controlled trial. Medical Journal of Indonesia 2017;
26: 134-140.

327.

Chen Y, Gao Y. Comparison of Balanced Crystalloids versus Normal Saline in Critically
Ill Patients: A Systematic Review with Meta-Analysis and Trial Sequential Analysis of
Randomized Controlled Trials. Ther Clin Risk Manag 2023; 19: 783-799.
404

Choosakul S, Harinwan K, Chirapongsathorn S, et al. Comparison of normal saline
versus Lactated Ringer's solution for fluid resuscitation in patients with mild acute
pancreatitis, A randomized controlled trial. Pancreatology 2018; 18: 507-512.

329.

Ratanarat R, Sanguanwit P, Chitsomkasem A. The effects of normal saline versus
balanced crystalloid solution as a resuscitation fluid on acute kidney injury in shock
patients: a randomized opened label controlled trial. . Intensive Care Medicine
Experimental 2017; 5: S201.

330.

Young JB, Utter GH, Schermer CR, et al. Saline versus Plasma-Lyte A in initial
resuscitation of trauma patients: a randomized trial. Ann Surg 2014; 259: 255-262.

331.

Yunos NM, Bellomo R, Hegarty C, et al. Association between a chloride-liberal vs
chloride-restrictive intravenous fluid administration strategy and kidney injury in
critically ill adults. JAMA 2012; 308: 1566-1572.

332.

Young P, Bailey M, Beasley R, et al. Effect of a Buffered Crystalloid Solution vs Saline
on Acute Kidney Injury Among Patients in the Intensive Care Unit: The SPLIT
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2015; 314: 1701-1710.

333.

Self WH, Semler MW, Wanderer JP, et al. Balanced Crystalloids versus Saline in
Noncritically Ill Adults. N Engl J Med 2018; 378: 819-828.

334.

Semler MW, Self WH, Wanderer JP, et al. Balanced Crystalloids versus Saline in
Critically Ill Adults. N Engl J Med 2018; 378: 829-839.

R

AF
T

328.

Finfer S, Micallef S, Hammond N, et al. Balanced Multielectrolyte Solution versus Saline
in Critically Ill Adults. N Engl J Med 2022; 386: 815-826.

336.

Zampieri FG, Machado FR, Biondi RS, et al. Effect of Intravenous Fluid Treatment With
a Balanced Solution vs 0.9% Saline Solution on Mortality in Critically Ill Patients: The
BaSICS Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2021; 326: 1-12.

D

335.

337.

Hammond NE, Zampieri FG, Di Tanna GL, et al. Balanced Crystalloids versus Saline in
Critically Ill Adults - A Systematic Review with Meta-Analysis. NEJM Evid 2022; 1:
EVIDoa2100010.

338.

Shaw AD, Bagshaw SM, Goldstein SL, et al. Major complications, mortality, and
resource utilization after open abdominal surgery: 0.9% saline compared to Plasma-Lyte.
Ann Surg 2012; 255: 821-829.

339.

Anantasit N, Thasanthiah S, Lertbunrian R. Balanced salt solution versus normal saline
solution as initial fluid resuscitation in pediatric septic shock: A randomized, doubleblind controlled trial. . Crit Care Shock 2020; 23.
405

Balamuth F, Kittick M, McBride P, et al. Pragmatic Pediatric Trial of Balanced Versus
Normal Saline Fluid in Sepsis: The PRoMPT BOLUS Randomized Controlled Trial Pilot
Feasibility Study. Acad Emerg Med 2019; 26: 1346-1356.

341.

Sankar J, Muralidharan J, Lalitha AV, et al. Multiple Electrolytes Solution Versus Saline
as Bolus Fluid for Resuscitation in Pediatric Septic Shock: A Multicenter Randomized
Clinical Trial. Crit Care Med 2023; 51: 1449-1460.

342.

Yung M, Letton G, Keeley S. Controlled trial of Hartmann's solution versus 0.9% saline
for diabetic ketoacidosis. J Paediatr Child Health 2017; 53: 12-17.

343.

Allen CH, Goldman RD, Bhatt S, et al. A randomized trial of Plasma-Lyte A and 0.9 %
sodium chloride in acute pediatric gastroenteritis. BMC Pediatr 2016; 16: 117.

344.

Arya V, Kavitha M, Mittal K, et al. Plasmalyte versus normal saline as resuscitation fluid
in children: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Pediatric Critical Care 2021; 8:
134-138.

345.

Dung NM, Day NP, Tam DT, et al. Fluid replacement in dengue shock syndrome: a
randomized, double-blind comparison of four intravenous-fluid regimens. Clin Infect Dis
1999; 29: 787-794.

346.

Kartha GB, Rameshkumar R, Mahadevan S. Randomized Double-blind Trial of Ringer
Lactate Versus Normal Saline in Pediatric Acute Severe Diarrheal Dehydration. J Pediatr
Gastroenterol Nutr 2017; 65: 621-626.

R

AF
T

340.

Mahajan V, Sajan SS, Sharma A, et al. Ringers lactate vs Normal saline for children with
acute diarrhea and severe dehydration- a double blind randomized controlled trial. Indian
Pediatr 2012; 49: 963-968.

348.

Ngo NT, Cao XT, Kneen R, et al. Acute management of dengue shock syndrome: a
randomized double-blind comparison of 4 intravenous fluid regimens in the first hour.
Clin Infect Dis 2001; 32: 204-213.

349.

Raman S, Gibbons KS, Mattke A, et al. Effect of Saline vs Gluconate/Acetate-Buffered
Solution vs Lactate-Buffered Solution on Serum Chloride Among Children in the
Pediatric Intensive Care Unit: The SPLYT-P Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Pediatr
2023; 177: 122-131.

350.

Sankar J, Muralidharan J, AV L, et al. 33: Balanced Crystalloids Versus Saline for Initial
Fluid Resuscitation in Children With Septic Shock. Critical Care Medicine 2021; 49: 17.

351.

Trepatchayakorn S, Sakunpunphuk M, Samransamruajkit R. Balanced Salt Solution
Versus Normal Saline in Resuscitation of Pediatric Sepsis: A Randomized, Controlled
Trial. Indian J Pediatr 2021; 88: 921-924.

D

347.

406

Williams V, Jayashree M, Nallasamy K, et al. 0.9% saline versus Plasma-Lyte as initial
fluid in children with diabetic ketoacidosis (SPinK trial): a double-blind randomized
controlled trial. Crit Care 2020; 24: 1.

353.

Antequera Martin AM, Barea Mendoza JA, Muriel A, et al. Buffered solutions versus
0.9% saline for resuscitation in critically ill adults and children. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2019; 7: CD012247.

354.

Semler MW, Wanderer JP, Ehrenfeld JM, et al. Balanced Crystalloids versus Saline in
the Intensive Care Unit. The SALT Randomized Trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2017;
195: 1362-1372.

355.

Zampieri FG, Cavalcanti AB, Di Tanna GL, et al. Balanced crystalloids versus saline for
critically ill patients (BEST-Living): a systematic review and individual patient data
meta-analysis. Lancet Respir Med 2024; 12: 237-246.

356.

Weinberg L, Collins N, Van Mourik K, et al. Plasma-Lyte 148: A clinical review. World
J Crit Care Med 2016; 5: 235-250.

357.

Silva C, Marcos P. Intravenous fluid therapy: essential components and key
considerations. Porto Biomed J 2025; 10: e296.

358.

Yin X, Tian M, Sun L, et al. Barriers and Facilitators to Implementing Reduced-Sodium
Salts as a Population-Level Intervention: A Qualitative Study. Nutrients 2021; 13: 3225.

359.

Fang ZX, Li YF, Zhou XQ, et al. Effects of resuscitation with crystalloid fluids on
cardiac function in patients with severe sepsis. BMC Infect Dis 2008; 8: 50.

360.

Jaber S, Paugam C, Futier E, et al. Sodium bicarbonate therapy for patients with severe
metabolic acidaemia in the intensive care unit (BICAR-ICU): a multicentre, open-label,
randomised controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet 2018; 392: 31-40.

D

R

AF
T

352.

361.

Jung B, Jabaudon M, De Jong A, et al. Sodium Bicarbonate for Severe Metabolic
Acidemia and Acute Kidney Injury: The BICARICU-2 Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA
2025; 334: 2000-2010.

362.

Lo KB, Garvia V, Stempel JM, et al. Bicarbonate use and mortality outcome among
critically ill patients with metabolic acidosis: A meta analysis. Heart Lung 2020; 49: 167174.

363.

Schneider AG, Bellomo R, Reade M, et al. Safety evaluation of a trial of lipocalindirected sodium bicarbonate infusion for renal protection in at-risk critically ill patients.
Crit Care Resusc 2013; 15: 126-133.

407

Serpa Neto A, Fujii T, McNamara M, et al. Sodium Bicarbonate for Metabolic Acidosis
in the ICU: Results of a Pilot Randomized Double-Blind Clinical Trial. Crit Care Med
2023; 51: e221-e233.

365.

Takia L, Baranwal AK, Gupta PK, et al. Additional Bicarbonate Infusion Complements
WHO Rehydration Therapy in Children with Acute Diarrhea and Severe Dehydration
Presenting with Severe Non-anion Gap Metabolic Acidemia: An Open Label
Randomized Trial. Indian J Pediatr 2025; 92: 268-276.

366.

Kallet RH, Liu K, Tang J. Management of acidosis during lung-protective ventilation in
acute respiratory distress syndrome. Respir Care Clin N Am 2003; 9: 437-456.

367.

Akerberg D, Ansari D, Bergenfeldt M, et al. Early postoperative fluid retention is a
strong predictor for complications after pancreatoduodenectomy. HPB (Oxford) 2019;
21: 1784-1789.

368.

Holte K, Sharrock NE, Kehlet H. Pathophysiology and clinical implications of
perioperative fluid excess. Br J Anaesth 2002; 89: 622-632.

369.

Miller TE, Mythen M, Shaw AD, et al. Association between perioperative fluid
management and patient outcomes: a multicentre retrospective study. Br J Anaesth 2021;
126: 720-729.

370.

Shin CH, Long DR, McLean D, et al. Effects of Intraoperative Fluid Management on
Postoperative Outcomes: A Hospital Registry Study. Ann Surg 2018; 267: 1084-1092.

371.

Myles PS, Bellomo R, Corcoran T, et al. Restrictive versus Liberal Fluid Therapy for
Major Abdominal Surgery. N Engl J Med 2018; 378: 2263-2274.

372.

Brandstrup B, Tonnesen H, Beier-Holgersen R, et al. Effects of intravenous fluid
restriction on postoperative complications: comparison of two perioperative fluid
regimens: a randomized assessor-blinded multicenter trial. Ann Surg 2003; 238: 641-648.

D

R

AF
T

364.

373.

Futier E, Constantin JM, Petit A, et al. Conservative vs restrictive individualized goaldirected fluid replacement strategy in major abdominal surgery: A prospective
randomized trial. Arch Surg 2010; 145: 1193-1200.

374.

Gao T, Li N, Zhang JJ, et al. Restricted intravenous fluid regimen reduces the rate of
postoperative complications and alters immunological activity of elderly patients
operated for abdominal cancer: a randomized prospective clinical trail. World J Surg
2012; 36: 993-1002.

375.

Holte K, Foss NB, Andersen J, et al. Liberal or restrictive fluid administration in fasttrack colonic surgery: a randomized, double-blind study. Br J Anaesth 2007; 99: 500508.
408

Holte K, Kristensen BB, Valentiner L, et al. Liberal versus restrictive fluid management
in knee arthroplasty: a randomized, double-blind study. Anesth Analg 2007; 105: 465474.

377.

Jie HY, Ye JL, Zhou HH, et al. Perioperative restricted fluid therapy preserves
immunological function in patients with colorectal cancer. World J Gastroenterol 2014;
20: 15852-15859.

378.

Matot I, Paskaleva R, Eid L, et al. Effect of the volume of fluids administered on
intraoperative oliguria in laparoscopic bariatric surgery: a randomized controlled trial.
Arch Surg 2012; 147: 228-234.

379.

Nisanevich V, Felsenstein I, Almogy G, et al. Effect of intraoperative fluid management
on outcome after intraabdominal surgery. Anesthesiology 2005; 103: 25-32.

380.

Futier E, Lefrant JY, Guinot PG, et al. Effect of Individualized vs Standard Blood
Pressure Management Strategies on Postoperative Organ Dysfunction Among High-Risk
Patients Undergoing Major Surgery: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2017; 318:
1346-1357.

381.

Venkatachalam MA, Weinberg JM, Kriz W, et al. Failed Tubule Recovery, AKI-CKD
Transition, and Kidney Disease Progression. J Am Soc Nephrol 2015; 26: 1765-1776.

382.

Panwar R, Tarvade S, Lanyon N, et al. Relative Hypotension and Adverse Kidney-related
Outcomes among Critically Ill Patients with Shock. A Multicenter, Prospective Cohort
Study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2020; 202: 1407-1418.

R

AF
T

376.

Sun LY, Wijeysundera DN, Tait GA, et al. Association of intraoperative hypotension
with acute kidney injury after elective noncardiac surgery. Anesthesiology 2015; 123:
515-523.

D

383.

384.

Kant M, van Klei WA, Hollmann MW, et al. Proactive vs Reactive Treatment of
Hypotension During Surgery: The PRETREAT Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2025;
334: 1905-1914.

385.

Pang Z, Liang S, Zhou N, et al. Individualized blood pressure regulation and acute
kidney injury in older patients having major abdominal surgery: a pilot randomized trial.
Int J Surg 2025; 111: 2894-2902.

386.

Saugel B, Meidert AS, Brunkhorst FM, et al. Individualized Perioperative Blood Pressure
Management in Patients Undergoing Major Abdominal Surgery: The IMPROVE-multi
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2025; 334: 1893-1904.

387.

Monnet X, Messina A, Greco M, et al. ESICM guidelines on circulatory shock and
hemodynamic monitoring 2025. Intensive Care Med 2025; 51: 1971-2012.
409

Hayward A, Robertson A, Thiruchelvam T, et al. Oxygen delivery in pediatric cardiac
surgery and its association with acute kidney injury using machine learning. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 2023; 165: 1505-1516.

389.

Long F, Zhang Y, Luo M, et al. Goal-directed Perfusion to Reduce Acute Kidney Injury
After Pediatric Cardiac Operation. Ann Thorac Surg 2025; 119: 891-898.

390.

Xiao R, Luo M, Yu H, et al. Relationship between intraoperative blood pressure
variability and postoperative acute kidney injury in pediatric cardiac surgery. Pediatr
Nephrol 2025; 40: 2071-2081.

391.

Zhang Y, Wang B, Zhou XJ, et al. Nadir Oxygen Delivery During Pediatric Bypass as a
Predictor of Acute Kidney Injury. Ann Thorac Surg 2022; 113: 647-653.

392.

Yerke JR, Mireles-Cabodevila E, Chen AY, et al. Peripheral Administration of
Norepinephrine: A Prospective Observational Study. Chest 2024; 165: 348-355.

393.

Lamontagne F, Meade MO, Hebert PC, et al. Higher versus lower blood pressure targets
for vasopressor therapy in shock: a multicentre pilot randomized controlled trial.
Intensive Care Med 2016; 42: 542-550.

394.

Lamontagne F, Richards-Belle A, Thomas K, et al. Effect of Reduced Exposure to
Vasopressors on 90-Day Mortality in Older Critically Ill Patients With Vasodilatory
Hypotension: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2020; 323: 938-949.

395.

Asfar P, Meziani F, Hamel JF, et al. High versus low blood-pressure target in patients
with septic shock. N Engl J Med 2014; 370: 1583-1593.

396.

Vedel AG, Holmgaard F, Rasmussen LS, et al. High-Target Versus Low-Target Blood
Pressure Management During Cardiopulmonary Bypass to Prevent Cerebral Injury in
Cardiac Surgery Patients: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Circulation 2018; 137: 17701780.

D

R

AF
T

388.

397.

Wu X, Jiang Z, Ying J, et al. Optimal blood pressure decreases acute kidney injury after
gastrointestinal surgery in elderly hypertensive patients: A randomized study: Optimal
blood pressure reduces acute kidney injury. J Clin Anesth 2017; 43: 77-83.

398.

De Backer D, Cecconi M, Chew MS, et al. A plea for personalization of the
hemodynamic management of septic shock. Crit Care 2022; 26: 372.

399.

De Backer D, Biston P, Devriendt J, et al. Comparison of dopamine and norepinephrine
in the treatment of shock. N Engl J Med 2010; 362: 779-789.

410

Russell JA, Walley KR, Singer J, et al. Vasopressin versus norepinephrine infusion in
patients with septic shock. N Engl J Med 2008; 358: 877-887.

401.

Gordon AC, Mason AJ, Thirunavukkarasu N, et al. Effect of Early Vasopressin vs
Norepinephrine on Kidney Failure in Patients With Septic Shock: The VANISH
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2016; 316: 509-518.

402.

Hajjar LA, Vincent JL, Barbosa Gomes Galas FR, et al. Vasopressin versus
Norepinephrine in Patients with Vasoplegic Shock after Cardiac Surgery: The VANCS
Randomized Controlled Trial. Anesthesiology 2017; 126: 85-93.

403.

Morelli A, Ertmer C, Rehberg S, et al. Continuous terlipressin versus vasopressin
infusion in septic shock (TERLIVAP): a randomized, controlled pilot study. Crit Care
2009; 13: R130.

404.

Morelli A, Ertmer C, Rehberg S, et al. Phenylephrine versus norepinephrine for initial
hemodynamic support of patients with septic shock: a randomized, controlled trial. Crit
Care 2008; 12: R143.

405.

Tumlin JA, Murugan R, Deane AM, et al. Outcomes in Patients with Vasodilatory Shock
and Renal Replacement Therapy Treated with Intravenous Angiotensin II. Crit Care Med
2018; 46: 949-957.

406.

Laterre PF, Berry SM, Blemings A, et al. Effect of Selepressin vs Placebo on Ventilatorand Vasopressor-Free Days in Patients With Septic Shock: The SEPSIS-ACT
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2019; 322: 1476-1485.

R

AF
T

400.

Busse LW, Ostermann M. Vasopressor Therapy and Blood Pressure Management in the
Setting of Acute Kidney Injury. Semin Nephrol 2019; 39: 462-472.

408.

Groups P-TIS. A sub-study of the POISE-3 randomized trial examined effects of a
perioperative hypotension-avoidance strategy versus a hypertension-avoidance strategy
on the risk of acute kidney injury. Kidney Int 2025; 107: 155-168.

D

407.

409.

Andromeda-Shock-2 Investigators for the Andromeda Research Network SSoAR, Pain T,
Latin American Intensive Care N, et al. Personalized Hemodynamic Resuscitation
Targeting Capillary Refill Time in Early Septic Shock: The ANDROMEDA-SHOCK-2
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2025; 334: 1988-1999.

410.

Penev Y, Ruppert MM, Bilgili A, et al. Intraoperative hypotension and postoperative
acute kidney injury: A systematic review. Am J Surg 2024; 232: 45-53.

411.

Schuurmans J, van Rossem BTB, Rellum SR, et al. Hypotension during intensive care
stay and mortality and morbidity: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Intensive Care
Med 2024; 50: 516-525.
411

Chen HH, Anstrom KJ, Givertz MM, et al. Low-dose dopamine or low-dose nesiritide in
acute heart failure with renal dysfunction: the ROSE acute heart failure randomized trial.
JAMA 2013; 310: 2533-2543.

413.

Prins I, Plotz FB, Uiterwaal CS, et al. Low-dose dopamine in neonatal and pediatric
intensive care: a systematic review. Intensive Care Med 2001; 27: 206-210.

414.

Friedrich JO, Adhikari N, Herridge MS, et al. Meta-analysis: low-dose dopamine
increases urine output but does not prevent renal dysfunction or death. Ann Intern Med
2005; 142: 510-524.

415.

Kellum JA, J MD. Use of dopamine in acute renal failure: a meta-analysis. Crit Care
Med 2001; 29: 1526-1531.

416.

Marik PE. Low-dose dopamine: a systematic review. Intensive Care Med 2002; 28: 877883.

417.

von Groote TC, Ostermann M, Forni LG, et al. The AKI care bundle: all bundle
components are created equal-are they? Intensive Care Med 2022; 48: 242-245.

418.

Li Z, Tie H, Shi R, et al. Urinary [TIMP-2].[IGFBP7]-guided implementation of the
KDIGO bundle to prevent acute kidney injury: a meta-analysis. Br J Anaesth 2022; 128:
e24-e26.

419.

See CY, Pan HC, Chen JY, et al. Improvement of composite kidney outcomes by AKI
care bundles: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care 2023; 27: 390.

R

AF
T

412.

Goldstein SL, Dahale D, Kirkendall ES, et al. A prospective multi-center quality
improvement initiative (NINJA) indicates a reduction in nephrotoxic acute kidney injury
in hospitalized children. Kidney Int 2020; 97: 580-588.

D

420.

421.

Diaz F, Nunez MJ, Pino P, et al. Implementation of preemptive fluid strategy as a bundle
to prevent fluid overload in children with acute respiratory distress syndrome and sepsis.
BMC Pediatr 2018; 18: 207.

422.

Foglia MJ, Bedoyan SM, Horvat CM, et al. Fluid Management Bundle in Critically Ill
Children With Respiratory Failure Is Associated With a Reduced Prevalence of Excess
Fluid Accumulation. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2025; 26: e454-e462.

423.

Kapoor PM, Karanjkar A, Magoon R, et al. Effect of goal-directed therapy on postoperative neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin profile in patients undergoing onpump coronary artery surgery. Indian J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2019; 35: 445-452.

412

Schanz M, Wasser C, Allgaeuer S, et al. Urinary [TIMP-2].[IGFBP7]-guided randomized
controlled intervention trial to prevent acute kidney injury in the emergency department.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2019; 34: 1902-1909.

425.

Kolhe NV, Staples D, Reilly T, et al. Impact of Compliance with a Care Bundle on Acute
Kidney Injury Outcomes: A Prospective Observational Study. PLoS One 2015; 10:
e0132279.

426.

Kullmar M, Massoth C, Ostermann M, et al. Biomarker-guided implementation of the
KDIGO guidelines to reduce the occurrence of acute kidney injury in patients after
cardiac surgery (PrevAKI-multicentre): protocol for a multicentre, observational study
followed by randomised controlled feasibility trial. BMJ Open 2020; 10: e034201.

427.

Hashimoto H, Yamada H, Murata M, et al. Diuretics for preventing and treating acute
kidney injury. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2025; 1: CD014937.

428.

Ostermann M, Alshamsi F, Artigas Raventos A, et al. European Society of Intensive Care
Medicine Clinical Practice Guideline on fluid therapy in adult critically ill patients: Part
3-fluid removal at de-escalation phase. Intensive Care Med 2025; 51: 1749-1763.

429.

Oliveira CF, Creche I, al. e. Acute kidney injury and fluid overload in children supported
with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for a respiratory indication. . Pediatr Crit
Care Med 2019; 20: e448-e456.

430.

Selewski DT, Cornell TT, Heung M, et al. Early fluid overload is associated with acute
kidney injury and PICU mortality in critically ill children. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2015;
16: e161-e169.

R

AF
T

424.

Stark MJ, Kent AL, al. e. High early fluid and sodium intake as risk factors for acute
kidney injury in very-low-birth-weight infants. Pediatr Nephrol 2025; 41:1191-1201.

432.

Alobaidi R, Morgan C, Basu RK, et al. Association Between Fluid Balance and
Outcomes in Critically Ill Children: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. JAMA
Pediatr 2018; 172: 257-268.

433.

Grams ME, Estrella MM, Coresh J, et al. Fluid balance, diuretic use, and mortality in
acute kidney injury. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2011; 6: 966-973.

434.

Silversides JA, Major E, Ferguson AJ, et al. Conservative fluid management or
deresuscitation for patients with sepsis or acute respiratory distress syndrome following
the resuscitation phase of critical illness: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Intensive
Care Med 2017; 43: 155-170.

435.

Rasoul D, Zhang J, Farnell E, et al. Continuous infusion versus bolus injection of loop
diuretics for acute heart failure. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2024; 5: CD014811.

D

431.

413

Krzych LJ, Czempik PF. Impact of furosemide on mortality and the requirement for renal
replacement therapy in acute kidney injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis of
randomised trials. Ann Intensive Care 2019; 9: 85.

437.

Adigbli D, Li Y, Hammond N, et al. A Patient-Level Meta-Analysis of Intensive Glucose
Control in Critically Ill Adults. NEJM Evid 2024; 3: EVIDoa2400082.

438.

Blinder JJ, Asaro LA, Wypij D, et al. Acute Kidney Injury After Pediatric Cardiac
Surgery: A Secondary Analysis of the Safe Pediatric Euglycemia After Cardiac Surgery
Trial. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2017; 18: 638-646.

439.

Goswami S, Gist KM, Bjornstad P, et al. Hyperglycemia and kidney outcomes in
critically ill children and young adults on continuous kidney replacement therapy. Pediatr
Nephrol 2025; 40: 2957-2966.

440.

Jiang W, Shi K, Shao J, et al. Protective effect of intravenous amino acid on kidney
function: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Crit
Care 2025; 85: 154937.

441.

Kahlberg A, Tshomba Y, Baccellieri D, et al. Renal perfusion with histidine-tryptophanketoglutarate compared with Ringer's solution in patients undergoing thoracoabdominal
aortic open repair. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2023; 165: 569-579 e565.

442.

Kazawa M, Kabata D, Yoshida H, et al. Amino acids to prevent cardiac surgeryassociated acute kidney injury: a randomized controlled trial. JA Clin Rep 2024; 10: 19.

R

AF
T

436.

Landoni G, Monaco F, Ti LK, et al. A Randomized Trial of Intravenous Amino Acids for
Kidney Protection. N Engl J Med 2024; 391: 687-698.

444.

Pu H, Doig GS, Heighes PT, et al. Intravenous amino acid therapy for kidney protection
in cardiac surgery patients: A pilot randomized controlled trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc
Surg 2019; 157: 2356-2366.

D

443.

445.

Baiardo Redaelli M, Monaco F, Bradic N, et al. Amino Acid Infusion for Kidney
Protection in Cardiac Surgery Patients with Chronic Kidney Disease: A Secondary
Analysis of the PROTECTION Trial. Anesthesiology 2025; 142: 818-828.

446.

Pruna A, Losiggio R, Landoni G, et al. Amino Acid Infusion for Perioperative Functional
Renal Protection: A Meta-analysis. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2024; 38: 3076-3085.

447.

Cao Z, Shen R, Zhang X, et al. Effects of remote ischemic preconditioning on acute
myocardial injury in patients undergoing valve replacement. Ir J Med Sci 2017; 186: 889893.

414

Choi YS, Shim JK, Kim JC, et al. Effect of remote ischemic preconditioning on renal
dysfunction after complex valvular heart surgery: a randomized controlled trial. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 2011; 142: 148-154.

449.

Gasparovic H, Kopjar T, Rados M, et al. Impact of remote ischemic preconditioning
preceding coronary artery bypass grafting on inducing neuroprotection. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 2019; 157: 1466-1476 e1463.

450.

Meersch M, Kullmar M, Pavenstadt H, et al. Effects of Different Doses of Remote
Ischemic Preconditioning on Kidney Damage Among Patients Undergoing Cardiac
Surgery: A Single-Center Mechanistic Randomized Controlled Trial. Crit Care Med
2020; 48: e690-e697.

451.

Rahman IA, Mascaro JG, Steeds RP, et al. Remote ischemic preconditioning in human
coronary artery bypass surgery: from promise to disappointment? Circulation 2010; 122:
S53-59.

452.

Song JW, Lee WK, Lee S, et al. Remote ischaemic conditioning for prevention of acute
kidney injury after valvular heart surgery: a randomised controlled trial. Br J Anaesth
2018; 121: 1034-1040.

453.

Song Y, Song JW, Lee S, et al. Effects of remote ischemic preconditioning in patients
with concentric myocardial hypertrophy: A randomized, controlled trial with molecular
insights. Int J Cardiol 2017; 249: 36-41.

454.

Wang H, Lyu Y, Liao Q, et al. Effects of Remote Ischemic Preconditioning in Patients
Undergoing Off-Pump Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery. Front Physiol 2019; 10:
495.

R

AF
T

448.

Zarbock A, Kellum JA, Van Aken H, et al. Long-term Effects of Remote Ischemic
Preconditioning on Kidney Function in High-risk Cardiac Surgery Patients: Follow-up
Results from the RenalRIP Trial. Anesthesiology 2017; 126: 787-798.

D

455.

456.

Zarbock A, Schmidt C, Van Aken H, et al. Effect of remote ischemic preconditioning on
kidney injury among high-risk patients undergoing cardiac surgery: a randomized clinical
trial. JAMA 2015; 313: 2133-2141.

457.

Law YM, Hsu C, Hingorani SR, et al. Randomized controlled trial of remote ischemic
preconditioning in children having cardiac surgery. J Cardiothorac Surg 2024; 19: 5.

458.

Cheng P, Wang G, An Y. The Protective Effect of Remote Ischemic Preconditioning on
Acute Kidney Injury Following Pediatric Cardiac Surgery: A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2025; 39: 2848-2856.

415

Zarbock A, Schone LM, Kellum JA, et al. Impact of propofol or sevoflurane on the
renoprotective effect of remote ischaemic preconditioning in cardiac surgery: the
HypnoRenalRIP randomised clinical trial. Br J Anaesth 2025; 135: 1626-1634.

460.

Pitre T, Kiflen M, Helmeczi W, et al. The Comparative Effectiveness of Vasoactive
Treatments for Hepatorenal Syndrome: A Systematic Review and Network MetaAnalysis. Crit Care Med 2022; 50: 1419-1429.

461.

U.S. Food and Drug Administration. (2022, September 14). FDA approves treatment to
improve kidney function in adults with hepatorenal syndrome.
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/news-events-human-drugs/fda-approves-treatment-improvekidney-function-adults-hepatorenal-syndrome

462.

Maghsudlou M, Nourozi A, Mehravar F, et al. A Comparative Analysis of
Norepinephrine with Midodrine/Octreotide in Patients with Hepatorenal Syndrome-acute
Kidney Injury. The Open Urology & Nephrology Journal 2024; 17 675948.

463.

Khan ZA, M. S, Iqbal J, et al. Hepatorenal Syndrome: Examine the Treatment
Effectiveness of Terlipressin and Albumin. P J M H S 16: 333.

464.

Mujtaba MA, Gamilla-Crudo AK, Merwat SN, et al. Terlipressin in combination with
albumin as a therapy for hepatorenal syndrome in patients aged 65 years or older. Ann
Hepatol 2023; 28: 101126.

465.

Singal AK, Palmer G, Melick L, et al. Vasoconstrictor Therapy for Acute Kidney Injury
Hepatorenal Syndrome: A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Studies. Gastro Hep Adv 2023;
2: 455-464.

R

AF
T

459.

Velez JCQ, Wong F, Reddy KR, et al. The Effect of Terlipressin on Renal Replacement
Therapy in Patients with Hepatorenal Syndrome. Kidney360 2023; 4: 1030-1038.

467.

Wan YM, Huang SQ, Wu HM, et al. Terlipressin versus placebo or noradrenalin in the
treatment of hepatorenal syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Front
Pharmacol 2024; 15: 1418826.

468.

Lupusoru G, Ailincai I, Fratila G, et al. Tumor Lysis Syndrome: An Endless Challenge in
Onco-Nephrology. Biomedicines 2022; 10: 1012.

469.

Cairo MS, Bishop M. Tumour lysis syndrome: new therapeutic strategies and
classification. Br J Haematol 2004; 127: 3-11.

470.

Cairo MS, Coiffier B, Reiter A, et al. Recommendations for the evaluation of risk and
prophylaxis of tumour lysis syndrome (TLS) in adults and children with malignant
diseases: an expert TLS panel consensus. Br J Haematol 2010; 149: 578-586.

D

466.

416

Cheuk DK, Chiang AK, Chan GC, et al. Urate oxidase for the prevention and treatment
of tumour lysis syndrome in children with cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2014:
CD006945.

472.

Goldman SC, Holcenberg JS, Finklestein JZ, et al. A randomized comparison between
rasburicase and allopurinol in children with lymphoma or leukemia at high risk for tumor
lysis. Blood 2001; 97: 2998-3003.

473.

Pui CH, Relling MV, Lascombes F, et al. Urate oxidase in prevention and treatment of
hyperuricemia associated with lymphoid malignancies. Leukemia 1997; 11: 1813-1816.

474.

Renyi I, Bardi E, Udvardi E, et al. Prevention and treatment of hyperuricemia with
rasburicase in children with leukemia and non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Pathol Oncol Res
2007; 13: 57-62.

475.

Tatay VS, Castilla JD, Ponce JM, et al. [Rasburicase versus allopurinol in the treatment
of hyperuricaemia in tumour lysis syndrome]. An Pediatr (Barc) 2010; 72: 103-110.

476.

Cairo MS, Thompson S, Tangirala K, et al. A Clinical and Economic Comparison of
Rasburicase and Allopurinol in the Treatment of Patients With Clinical or Laboratory
Tumor Lysis Syndrome. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk 2017; 17: 173-178.

477.

Kim HW, Kim S, Ohn JH, et al. Role of bicarbonate and volume therapy in the
prevention of acute kidney injury in rhabdomyolysis: a retrospective propensity scorematched cohort study. Kidney Res Clin Pract 2022; 41: 310-321.

478.

Somagutta MR, Pagad S, Sridharan S, et al. Role of Bicarbonates and Mannitol in
Rhabdomyolysis: A Comprehensive Review. Cureus 2020; 12: e9742.

479.

Ostermann M, Macedo E, Oudemans-van Straaten H. How to feed a patient with acute
kidney injury. Intensive Care Med 2019; 45: 1006-1008.

D

R

AF
T

471.

480.

Reignier J, Boisrame-Helms J, Brisard L, et al. Enteral versus parenteral early nutrition in
ventilated adults with shock: a randomised, controlled, multicentre, open-label, parallelgroup study (NUTRIREA-2). Lancet 2018; 391: 133-143.

481.

Kyle UG, Akcan-Arikan A, Silva JC, et al. Protein Feeding in Pediatric Acute Kidney
Injury Is Not Associated With a Delay in Renal Recovery. J Ren Nutr 2017; 27: 8-15.

482.

Sabatino A, Regolisti G, Maggiore U, et al. Protein/energy debt in critically ill children in
the pediatric intensive care unit: acute kidney injury as a major risk factor. J Ren Nutr
2014; 24: 209-218.

417

Whale E, Bulling AEK, Fry SC. Biochemical characterisation of cellulose and cell-wallmatrix polysaccharides in variously oxidised sugar-beet pulp preparations differing in
viscosity. Int J Biol Macromol 2023; 253: 127356.

484.

Heyland DK, Patel J, Compher C, et al. The effect of higher protein dosing in critically ill
patients with high nutritional risk (EFFORT Protein): an international, multicentre,
pragmatic, registry-based randomised trial. Lancet 2023; 401: 568-576.

485.

Zhu R, Allingstrup MJ, Perner A, et al. The Effect of IV Amino Acid Supplementation
on Mortality in ICU Patients May Be Dependent on Kidney Function: Post Hoc
Subgroup Analyses of a Multicenter Randomized Trial. Crit Care Med 2018; 46: 12931301.

486.

Ostermann M, Summers J, Lei K, et al. Micronutrients in critically ill patients with
severe acute kidney injury - a prospective study. Sci Rep 2020; 10: 1505.

487.

Berger MM, Broman M, Forni L, et al. Nutrients and micronutrients at risk during renal
replacement therapy: a scoping review. Curr Opin Crit Care 2021; 27: 367-377.

488.

Prakash J, Prakash S, Ganiger VC. Changing epidemiology of acute kidney injury in
pregnancy: A journey of four decades from a developing country. Saudi J Kidney Dis
Transpl 2019; 30: 1118-1130.

489.

Shalaby AS, Shemies RS. Pregnancy-related acute kidney injury in the African continent:
where do we stand? A systematic review. J Nephrol 2022; 35: 2175-2189.

490.

Shah S, Verma P. Pregnancy-Related Acute Kidney Injury: Do We Know What to Do?
Nephron 2023; 147: 35-38.

491.

Nelson-Piercy C, Srisawat N, Kashani K, et al. Pregnancy-associated acute kidney injury
- consensus report of the 32nd Acute Disease Quality Initiative workgroup. Nat Rev
Nephrol 2025; 21: 633-646.

D

R

AF
T

483.

492.

Mahesh E, Puri S, Varma V, et al. Pregnancy-related acute kidney injury: An analysis of
165 cases. Indian J Nephrol 2017; 27: 113-117.

493.

Markov KV, Sapozhnikova AA. [Effect of long-term anti-arrhythmia treatment on the
status of ischemic heart disease patients]. Kardiologiia 1986; 26: 51-53.

494.

Jha V, Parameswaran S. Community-acquired acute kidney injury in tropical countries.
Nat Rev Nephrol 2013; 9: 278-290.

495.

Batte A, Shahrin L, Claure-Del Granado R, et al. Infections and Acute Kidney Injury: A
Global Perspective. Semin Nephrol 2023; 43: 151466.

418

Kumar V, Jha V. Community-Acquired AKI in Asia: An Update. Semin Nephrol 2020;
40: 456-467.

497.

Kusirisin P, da Silva Junior GB, Sitprija V, et al. Acute kidney injury in the tropics.
Nephrology (Carlton) 2023; 28: 5-20.

498.

Kumar V, Jha V. Community acquired and hospital acquired AKI - two diseases divided
by a common definition. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 2023; 32: 386-393.

499.

Prasad N, Jaiswal A, Meyyappan J, et al. Community-acquired acute kidney injury in
India: data from ISN-acute kidney injury registry. Lancet Reg Health Southeast Asia
2024; 21: 100359.

500.

Sethi J, Anandh U, Jha V. Nature's Cure or Kidney Curse? The Nephrotoxic Potential of
Indigenous Remedies. Indian J Nephrol 2025; 35: 335-342.

501.

Hajat S, Casula A, Murage P, et al. Ambient heat and acute kidney injury: case-crossover
analysis of 1 354 675 automated e-alert episodes linked to high-resolution climate data.
Lancet Planet Health 2024; 8: e156-e162.

502.

Kumar N, Latha Telagarapu VM, Fornoni A. Climate Change, Heat Stress, and Kidney
Disease-Associated Mortality and Health Care Utilization. Kidney Int Rep 2024; 9: 28442847.

503.

Laws RL, Brooks DR, Amador JJ, et al. Biomarkers of Kidney Injury Among
Nicaraguan Sugarcane Workers. Am J Kidney Dis 2016; 67: 209-217.

R

AF
T

496.

Garcia-Trabanino R, Jarquin E, Wesseling C, et al. Heat stress, dehydration, and kidney
function in sugarcane cutters in El Salvador--A cross-shift study of workers at risk of
Mesoamerican nephropathy. Environ Res 2015; 142: 746-755.

505.

Glaser J, Lemery J, Rajagopalan B, et al. Climate Change and the Emergent Epidemic of
CKD from Heat Stress in Rural Communities: The Case for Heat Stress Nephropathy.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2016; 11: 1472-1483.

506.

Fitzgerald JC, Ross ME, Thomas NJ, et al. Association of early hypotension in pediatric
sepsis with development of new or persistent acute kidney injury. Pediatr Nephrol 2021;
36: 451-461.

507.

Olsen J, Tunuguntla H, Alali A, et al. Central Venous Pressure and Impaired Renal
Function in Children and Young Adults With Cardiovascular Disease. JACC Adv 2024;
3: 100995.

D

504.

419

Lansbury LE, Rodrigo C, Leonardi-Bee J, et al. Corticosteroids as Adjunctive Therapy in
the Treatment of Influenza: An Updated Cochrane Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
Crit Care Med 2020; 48: e98-e106.

509.

Eisenberg MA, Georgette N, Baker AH, et al. Epinephrine vs Norepinephrine as Initial
Treatment in Children With Septic Shock. JAMA Netw Open 2025; 8: e254720.

510.

Gao Z, Wang X, Hua L, et al. Renal regional oxygenation during pediatric cardiac
surgery predicts acute kidney injury: a prospective cohort study with model comparisons.
Pediatr Res 2026.

511.

Wakamatsu Y, Nakanishi K, Satoh T, et al. Use of Renal Near-Infrared Spectroscopy and
Urinary Neutrophil Gelatinase-Associated Lipocalin Monitoring as Indicators of Acute
Kidney Injury in Pediatric Cardiac Surgery. J Clin Med 2023; 12: 2085.

512.

Ruf B, Bonelli V, Balling G, et al. Intraoperative renal near-infrared spectroscopy
indicates developing acute kidney injury in infants undergoing cardiac surgery with
cardiopulmonary bypass: a case-control study. Crit Care 2015; 19: 27.

513.

Wong Vega M, Juarez Calderon M, Tufan Pekkucuksen N, et al. Feeding modality is a
barrier to adequate protein provision in children receiving continuous renal replacement
therapy (CRRT). Pediatr Nephrol 2019; 34: 1147-1150.

514.

Zappitelli M, Juarez M, Castillo L, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy amino
acid, trace metal and folate clearance in critically ill children. Intensive Care Med 2009;
35: 698-706.

R

AF
T

508.

Saxena R, Anand A, Deep A. Use of terlipressin in critically ill children with liver
disease. BMC Nephrol 2020; 21: 360.

516.

Bellos I, Pandita A, Yachha M. Effectiveness of theophylline administration in neonates
with perinatal asphyxia: a meta-analysis. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2021; 34: 30803088.

D

515.

517.

Li S, Krawczeski CD, Zappitelli M, et al. Incidence, risk factors, and outcomes of acute
kidney injury after pediatric cardiac surgery: a prospective multicenter study. Crit Care
Med 2011; 39: 1493-1499.

518.

Checchia PA, Bronicki RA, Muenzer JT, et al. Nitric oxide delivery during
cardiopulmonary bypass reduces postoperative morbidity in children--a randomized trial.
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2013; 146: 530-536.

519.

Elzein C, Urbas C, Hughes B, et al. Efficacy of Nitric Oxide Administration in
Attenuating Ischemia/Reperfusion Injury During Neonatal Cardiopulmonary Bypass.
World J Pediatr Congenit Heart Surg 2020; 11: 417-423.
420

James C, Millar J, Horton S, et al. Nitric oxide administration during paediatric
cardiopulmonary bypass: a randomised controlled trial. Intensive Care Med 2016; 42:
1744-1752.

521.

Kolcz J, Karnas E, Madeja Z, et al. The cardioprotective and anti-inflammatory effect of
inhaled nitric oxide during Fontan surgery in patients with single ventricle congenital
heart defects: a prospective randomized study. J Intensive Care 2022; 10: 48.

522.

Miller OI, Tang SF, Keech A, et al. Inhaled nitric oxide and prevention of pulmonary
hypertension after congenital heart surgery: a randomised double-blind study. Lancet
2000; 356: 1464-1469.

523.

Niebler RA, Chiang-Ching H, Daley K, et al. Nitric oxide added to the sweep gas of the
oxygenator during cardiopulmonary bypass in infants: A pilot randomized controlled
trial. Artif Organs 2021; 45: 22-28.

524.

Schlapbach LJ, Gibbons KS, Horton SB, et al. Effect of Nitric Oxide via
Cardiopulmonary Bypass on Ventilator-Free Days in Young Children Undergoing
Congenital Heart Disease Surgery: The NITRIC Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2022;
328: 38-47.

525.

Ruan SY, Huang TM, Wu HY, et al. Inhaled nitric oxide therapy and risk of renal
dysfunction: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. Crit Care 2015;
19: 137.

526.

Gebistorf F, Karam O, Wetterslev J, et al. Inhaled nitric oxide for acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS) in children and adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016;
2016: CD002787.

R

AF
T

520.

Karimzadeh I, Barreto EF, Kellum JA, et al. Moving toward a contemporary
classification of drug-induced kidney disease. Crit Care 2023; 27: 435.

D

527.

528.

Ostermann M, Bellomo R, Burdmann EA, et al. Controversies in acute kidney injury:
conclusions from a Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Conference.
Kidney Int 2020; 98: 294-309.

529.

Blair M, Cote JM, Cotter A, et al. Nephrotoxicity from Vancomycin Combined with
Piperacillin-Tazobactam: A Comprehensive Review. Am J Nephrol 2021; 52: 85-97.

530.

Cote JM, Kane-Gill SL, Murray PT. A ray of hope in the discord: is adding piperacillintazobactam to vancomycin truly more nephrotoxic? Intensive Care Med 2022; 48: 12081210.

421

Liu TJ, Lam JP. Piperacillin-tazobactam-induced acute interstitial nephritis with possible
meropenem cross-sensitivity in a patient with osteomyelitis. Am J Health Syst Pharm
2012; 69: 1109.

532.

Parsels KA, Seabury RW, Darko W, et al. Recurrent Renal Dysfunction Secondary to
Probable Piperacillin-Tazobactam-Induced Acute Interstitial Nephritis. Ann
Pharmacother 2021; 55: 133-134.

533.

DiPiro, J. T., Talbert, R. L., Yee, G. C., Matzke, G. R., Wells, B. G., & Posey, L. M.
(Eds.). (2014). Pharmacotherapy: A Pathophysiologic Approach (9th ed.). McGraw-Hill
Education.

534.

Flannery AH, Bissell BD, Bastin MT, et al. Continuous Versus Intermittent Infusion of
Vancomycin and the Risk of Acute Kidney Injury in Critically Ill Adults: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis. Crit Care Med 2020; 48: 912-918.

535.

Gerard R, Pauquet E, Ros B, et al. Continuous Versus Intermittent Vancomycin Infusions
for Coagulase-negative Staphylococcus Bacteremia in Neonates: A Propensity-matched
Cohort Study. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2025; 44: 131-135.

536.

Maluangnon C, Tongyoo S, Permpikul C. Continuous Vancomycin Infusion versus
Intermittent Infusion in Critically Ill Patients. Infect Drug Resist 2022; 15: 7751-7760.

537.

Santos RM, Boyd AN, Walroth TA, et al. A Multicenter, Retrospective Outcome
Analysis of Vancomycin Area Under the Curve Versus Trough-Based Dosing Strategies
in Patients With Burn OR Inhalational Injuries (MONITOR). J Burn Care Res 2024; 45:
1383-1389.

R

AF
T

531.

Truong J, Smith SR, Veillette JJ, et al. Individualized Pharmacokinetic Dosing of
Vancomycin Reduces Time to Therapeutic Trough Concentrations in Critically Ill
Patients. J Clin Pharmacol 2018; 58: 1123-1130.

D

538.

539.

Kunming P, Xiaotian J, Qing X, et al. Impact of pharmacist intervention in reducing
vancomycin-associated acute kidney injury: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J
Clin Pharmacol 2023; 89: 526-535.

540.

Lee P, Mason C, Ahmad-Hossain H, et al. Evaluation of a Pharmacy Directed
Vancomycin and Monitoring Pilot Program at an Academic Pediatric Hospital. Open
Forum Infect Dis 2016; 3: 1923.

541.

Olson J, Stockmann C, Hersh AL, et al. Optimizing vancomycin prescribing through a
pharmacist driven monitoring intervention at a children's hospital. Open Forum Infect Dis
2016; 3: 1924.

542.

Cotner SE, Rutter WC, Burgess DR, et al. Influence of beta-Lactam Infusion Strategy on
Acute Kidney Injury. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2017; 61: e00871-00817.
422

Kunz Coyne AJ, Alshaer M, Casapao AM, et al. Effectiveness and Safety of BetaLactam Antibiotics with and without Therapeutic Drug Monitoring in Patients with
Pseudomonas aeruginosa Pneumonia or Bloodstream Infection. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2022; 66: e0064622.

544.

Shabaan AE, Nour I, Elsayed Eldegla H, et al. Conventional Versus Prolonged Infusion
of Meropenem in Neonates With Gram-negative Late-onset Sepsis: A Randomized
Controlled Trial. Pediatr Infect Dis J 2017; 36: 358-363.

545.

Yamada T, Fujii S, Shigemi A, et al. A meta-analysis of the target trough concentration
of gentamicin and amikacin for reducing the risk of nephrotoxicity. J Infect Chemother
2021; 27: 256-261.

546.

Polat EC, Koc A, Demirkan K. The role of the clinical pharmacist in the prevention of
drug-induced acute kidney injury in the intensive care unit. J Clin Pharm Ther 2022; 47:
2287-2294.

547.

Hambrick HR, Greco KF, Weller E, et al. Impact of decreasing vancomycin exposure on
acute kidney injury in stem cell transplant recipients. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2022; 43: 1375-1381.

548.

Kane-Gill SL. Health system perspectives in acute kidney injury: commitment to kidney
health and planning implementation interventions. Curr Opin Crit Care 2021; 27: 593603.

549.

Krishnamoorthy Y, Govindan D, Karunakaran M, et al. Global impact of antimicrobial
stewardship programs in Healthcare: An umbrella review of effectiveness, costefficiency, and implementation strategies. J Infect Chemother 2025; 31: 102753.

R

AF
T

543.

Kane-Gill SL. Nephrotoxin Stewardship. Crit Care Clin 2021; 37: 303-320.

D

550.
551.

Reuter SE, Stocker SL, Alffenaar JC, et al. Optimal Practice for Vancomycin Therapeutic
Drug Monitoring: Position Statement From the Anti-infectives Committee of the
International Association of Therapeutic Drug Monitoring and Clinical Toxicology. Ther
Drug Monit 2022; 44: 121-132.

552.

Rybak MJ, Le J, Lodise TP, et al. Therapeutic monitoring of vancomycin for serious
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus infections: A revised consensus guideline and
review by the American Society of Health-System Pharmacists, the Infectious Diseases
Society of America, the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society, and the Society of
Infectious Diseases Pharmacists. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2020; 77: 835-864.

553.

Usui J, Yamagata K, Imai E, et al. Clinical practice guideline for drug-induced kidney
injury in Japan 2016: digest version. Clin Exp Nephrol 2016; 20: 827-831.

423

Huang WC, Wang MT, Lai TS, et al. Nephrotoxins and acute kidney injury - The
consensus of the Taiwan acute kidney injury Task Force. J Formos Med Assoc 2022;
121: 886-895.

555.

Alqahtani S, Alhumoud A, Abushomi H, et al. Appropriate therapeutic drug monitoring
of antibiotics contributed to lower nephrotoxicity Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther 2020; 58:
82-88.

556.

Rivosecchi RM, Kellum JA, Dasta JF, et al. Drug Class Combination-Associated Acute
Kidney Injury. Ann Pharmacother 2016; 50: 953-972.

557.

Harezlak T, Religioni U, Szymanski FM, et al. Drug Interactions Affecting Kidney
Function: Beware of Health Threats from Triple Whammy. Adv Ther 2022; 39: 140-147.

558.

Ehrmann S, Helms J, Joret A, et al. Nephrotoxic drug burden among 1001 critically ill
patients: impact on acute kidney injury. Ann Intensive Care 2019; 9: 106.

559.

Moffett BS, Goldstein SL. Acute kidney injury and increasing nephrotoxic-medication
exposure in noncritically-ill children. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2011; 6: 856-863.

560.

Salerno SN, Liao Y, Jackson W, et al. Association between Nephrotoxic Drug
Combinations and Acute Kidney Injury in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit. J Pediatr
2021; 228: 213-219.

561.

Alatawi W, Wallace JL, Rungkitwattanakul D, et al. Risk of Acute Kidney Injury
Associated With Nephrotoxic Burden in Hospitalized Patients: A Scoping Review. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 2025; 119:891-904.

R

AF
T

554.

Gray MP, Barreto EF, Schreier DJ, et al. Consensus Obtained for the Nephrotoxic
Potential of 167 Drugs in Adult Critically Ill Patients Using a Modified Delphi Method.
Drug Saf 2022; 45: 389-398.

D

562.

563.

Stottlemyer BA, Abebe KZ, Palevsky PM, et al. Expert Consensus on the Nephrotoxic
Potential of 195 Medications in the Non-intensive Care Setting: A Modified Delphi
Method. Drug Saf 2023; 46: 677-687.

564.

Goldstein SL, Kirkendall E, Nguyen H, et al. Electronic health record identification of
nephrotoxin exposure and associated acute kidney injury. Pediatrics 2013; 132: e756767.

565.

Goldstein SL, Mottes T, Simpson K, et al. A sustained quality improvement program
reduces nephrotoxic medication-associated acute kidney injury. Kidney Int 2016; 90:
212-221.

424

Dubrofsky L, Kerzner RS, Delaunay C, et al. Interdisciplinary Systems-Based
Intervention to Improve IV Hydration during Parenteral Administration of Acyclovir.
Can J Hosp Pharm 2016; 69: 7-13.

567.

Yalcinkaya R, Oz FN, Kaman A, et al. Factors associated with acyclovir nephrotoxicity
in children: data from 472 pediatric patients from the last 10 years. Eur J Pediatr 2021;
180: 2521-2527.

568.

Perazella MA, Rosner MH. Drug-Induced Acute Kidney Injury. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
2022; 17: 1220-1233.

569.

Ozgan B, Ayhan YE, Apikoglu S, et al. Clinical pharmacist interventions in nutrition-and
drug-related problems in critically ill patients with renal dysfunction: a non-randomized
controlled study. Front Med (Lausanne) 2024; 11: 1473719.

570.

Such Diaz A, Saez de la Fuente J, Esteva L, et al. Drug prescribing in patients with renal
impairment optimized by a computer-based, semi-automated system. Int J Clin Pharm
2013; 35: 1170-1177.

571.

Sonoda A, Kondo Y, Iwashita Y, et al. In-Hospital Prescription Checking System for
Hospitalized Patients with Decreased Glomerular Filtration Rate. Kidney360 2022; 3:
1730-1737.

572.

Ebah L, Hanumapura P, Waring D, et al. A Multifaceted Quality Improvement
Programme to Improve Acute Kidney Injury Care and Outcomes in a Large Teaching
Hospital. BMJ Qual Improv Rep 2017; 6: u219176.w217476.

R

AF
T

566.

Falconnier AD, Haefeli WE, Schoenenberger RA, et al. Drug dosage in patients with
renal failure optimized by immediate concurrent feedback. J Gen Intern Med 2001; 16:
369-375.

574.

Ostermann M, Chawla LS, Forni LG, et al. Drug management in acute kidney disease Report of the Acute Disease Quality Initiative XVI meeting. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2018;
84: 396-403.

575.

Hou J, Li JF, Yan XJ, et al. The Effect of Clinical Pharmacist Intervention on Renal
Function Impairment in Patients with Antimicrobial-Induced Acute Kidney Injury in
ICU. Patient Prefer Adherence 2023; 17: 711-718.

576.

Klopotowska JE, Leopold JH, Bakker T, et al. Adverse drug events caused by three highrisk drug-drug interactions in patients admitted to intensive care units: A multicentre
retrospective observational study. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2024; 90: 164-175.

577.

Williams VL, Smithburger PL, Imhoff AN, et al. Interventions, Barriers, and Proposed
Solutions Associated With the Implementation of a Protocol That Uses Clinical Decision

D

573.

425

Support and a Stress Biomarker Test to Identify ICU Patients at High-Risk for Drug
Associated Acute Kidney Injury. Ann Pharmacother 2023; 57: 408-415.
McMullin ST, Reichley RM, Kahn MG, et al. Automated system for identifying potential
dosage problems at a large university hospital. Am J Health Syst Pharm 1997; 54: 545549.

579.

Miller JE, Reichley RM, McNamee LA, et al. Notification of real-time clinical alerts
generated by pharmacy expert systems. Proc AMIA Symp 1999: 325-329.

580.

Niedrig D, Krattinger R, Jodicke A, et al. Development, implementation and outcome
analysis of semi-automated alerts for metformin dose adjustment in hospitalized patients
with renal impairment. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2016; 25: 1204-1209.

581.

Kawamoto K, Houlihan CA, Balas EA, et al. Improving clinical practice using clinical
decision support systems: a systematic review of trials to identify features critical to
success. BMJ 2005; 330: 765.

582.

Roshanov PS, Fernandes N, Wilczynski JM, et al. Features of effective computerised
clinical decision support systems: meta-regression of 162 randomised trials. BMJ 2013;
346: f657.

583.

Desai RJ, Kazarov CL, Wong A, et al. Kidney Damage and Stress Biomarkers for Early
Identification of Drug-Induced Kidney Injury: A Systematic Review. Drug Saf 2022; 45:
839-852.

584.

Kane-Gill SL. New perspectives of drug related kidney diseases and disorders. Curr Opin
Crit Care 2024; 30: 563-570.

585.

Vanhoutte T, Sprangers B. Pseudo-AKI associated with targeted anti-cancer agents-the
truth is in the eye of the filtration marker. Clin Kidney J 2023; 16: 603-610.

D

R

AF
T

578.

586.

Barletta JF, Mangram AJ, Byrne M, et al. The importance of empiric antibiotic dosing in
critically ill trauma patients: Are we under-dosing based on augmented renal clearance
and inaccurate renal clearance estimates? J Trauma Acute Care Surg 2016; 81: 11151121.

587.

Nix DE, Erstad BL. Creatinine Assessment in Non-Steady-State Conditions: A Critical
Review. Ann Pharmacother 2021; 55: 1536-1544.

588.

Behal ML, Flannery AH, Barreto EF. Medication Management in the Critically Ill Patient
with Acute Kidney Injury. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2023; 18: 1080-1088.

426

Kadivarian S, Heydarpour F, Karimpour H, et al. Measured versus estimated creatinine
clearance in critically ill patients with acute kidney injury: an observational study. Acute
Crit Care 2022; 37: 185-192.

590.

Kwong YD, Chen S, Bouajram R, et al. The value of kinetic glomerular filtration rate
estimation on medication dosing in acute kidney injury. PLoS One 2019; 14: e0225601.

591.

Kanji S, Roger C, Taccone FS, et al. Practical considerations for individualizing drug
dosing in critically ill adults receiving renal replacement therapy. Pharmacotherapy
2023; 43: 1194-1205.

592.

Pistolesi V, Morabito S, Di Mario F, et al. A Guide to Understanding Antimicrobial Drug
Dosing in Critically Ill Patients on Renal Replacement Therapy. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2019; 63: e00583-00519.

593.

Jang SM, Infante S, Abdi Pour A. Drug Dosing Considerations in Critically Ill Patients
Receiving Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy. Pharmacy (Basel) 2020; 8: 18.

594.

Onichimowski D, Ziolkowski H, Nosek K, et al. Comparison of adsorption of selected
antibiotics on the filters in continuous renal replacement therapy circuits: in vitro studies.
J Artif Organs 2020; 23: 163-170.

595.

Uchida M, Sawada M, Yamazaki S, et al. Contribution of diafiltration and adsorption to
vancomycin clearance in a continuous hemodiafiltration circuit model in vitro. Artif
Organs 2022; 46: 1086-1096.

596.

He M, Wu Y, Xie Z, et al. Epidemiology of hospitalizations due to pesticide intoxicationassociated acute kidney injury in China. Int Urol Nephrol 2022; 54: 377-383.

597.

Moyce S, Joseph J, Tancredi D, et al. Cumulative Incidence of Acute Kidney Injury in
California's Agricultural Workers. J Occup Environ Med 2016; 58: 391-397.

D

R

AF
T

589.

598.

Ben Khadda Z, Fagroud M, El Karmoudi Y, et al. Association between pesticide
exposure and end-stage renal disease: A case-control study from Morocco based on the
STROBE guidelines. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf 2024; 288: 117360.

599.

Dereumeaux C, Fillol C, Quenel P, et al. Pesticide exposures for residents living close to
agricultural lands: A review. Environ Int 2020; 134: 105210.

600.

P Beyond Pesticides. Acute Kidney Failure Higher Among Farmers: High-Middle-Low
Income Countries Suffer Disparities. Beyond Pesticides, Beyond Pesticides, 2022.
Accessed January 29, 2026. https://beyondpesticides.org/dailynewsblog/2022/08/acutekidney-failure-higher-among-farmers-high-middle-low-income-countries-sufferdisparities/

427

Claure-Del Granado R, Espinosa-Cuevas M. Herbal Nephropathy. Contrib Nephrol 2021;
199: 143-154.

602.

Lukan CJ, Karimzadeh I, Tran TL, et al. A retrospective pharmacovigilance
disproportionality analysis of kidney injury events and natural products using data from
the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System (Under review).

603.

Newhouse JH, Kho D, Rao QA, et al. Frequency of serum creatinine changes in the
absence of iodinated contrast material: implications for studies of contrast nephrotoxicity.
AJR Am J Roentgenol 2008; 191: 376-382.

604.

CR Committee on Drugs and Contrast Media. ACR Manual on Contrast Media. ACR
Committee on Drugs and Contrast Media, 2025. Accessed January 29, 2026.
https://edge.sitecorecloud.io/americancoldf5f-acrorgf92a-productioncb023650/media/ACR/Files/Clinical/Contrast-Manual/ACR-Manual-on-Contrast-Media.pdf.

605.

Feng Y, Jun M, Wang AY, et al. Predicting Contrast-Associated Acute Kidney Injury.
JAMA Netw Open 2025; 8: e250107.

606.

Allen DW, Ma B, Leung KC, et al. Risk Prediction Models for Contrast-Induced Acute
Kidney Injury Accompanying Cardiac Catheterization: Systematic Review and Metaanalysis. Can J Cardiol 2017; 33: 724-736.

607.

Ma B, Allen DW, Graham MM, et al. Comparative Performance of Prediction Models
for Contrast-Associated Acute Kidney Injury After Percutaneous Coronary Intervention.
Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes 2019; 12: e005854.

R

AF
T

601.

Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Acute Kidney Injury Work
Group. KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Acute Kidney Injury. Kidney Int 2012; 2:
1-138.

D

608.

609.

Davenport MS, Perazella MA, Yee J, et al. Use of Intravenous Iodinated Contrast Media
in Patients With Kidney Disease: Consensus Statements from the American College of
Radiology and the National Kidney Foundation. Kidney Med 2020; 2: 85-93.

610.

Cashion W, Weisbord SD. Radiographic Contrast Media and the Kidney. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2022; 17: 1234-1242.

611.

Gupta S, Motwani SS, Seitter RH, et al. Development and Validation of a Risk Model for
Predicting Contrast-Associated Acute Kidney Injury in Patients With Cancer: Evaluation
in Over 46,000 CT Examinations. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2023; 221: 486-501.

612.

Wu MJ, Tsai SF. Patients with Different Stages of Chronic Kidney Disease Undergoing
Intravenous Contrast-Enhanced Computed Tomography-The Incidence of ContrastAssociated Acute Kidney Injury. Diagnostics (Basel) 2022; 12: 864.
428

Macdonald DB, Hurrell C, Costa AF, et al. Canadian Association of Radiologists
Guidance on Contrast Associated Acute Kidney Injury. Can Assoc Radiol J 2022; 73:
499-514.

614.

European Society of Urogenital Radiology (ESUR). ESUR Guidelines on Contrast
Agents. verison10.0. ESUR / Ezai, 2018. Accessed January 29, 2026.
https://www.esur.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/03/ESUR-Guidelines-10_0-FinalVersion.pdf.

615.

Briguori C, Airoldi F, D'Andrea D, et al. Renal Insufficiency Following Contrast Media
Administration Trial (REMEDIAL): a randomized comparison of 3 preventive strategies.
Circulation 2007; 115: 1211-1217.

616.

Huang C, Li SX, Mahajan S, et al. Development and Validation of a Model for
Predicting the Risk of Acute Kidney Injury Associated With Contrast Volume Levels
During Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. JAMA Netw Open 2019; 2: e1916021.

617.

Keaney JJ, Hannon CM, Murray PT. Contrast-induced acute kidney injury: how much
contrast is safe? Nephrol Dial Transplant 2013; 28: 1376-1383.

618.

Malik AO, Amin A, Kennedy K, et al. Patient-centered contrast thresholds to reduce
acute kidney injury in high-risk patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention.
Am Heart J 2021; 234: 51-59.

619.

Brown JR, Solomon R, Stabler ME, et al. Team-Based Coaching Intervention to Improve
Contrast-Associated Acute Kidney Injury: A Cluster-Randomized Trial. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2023; 18: 315-326.

R

AF
T

613.

Brown JR, Robb JF, Block CA, et al. Does safe dosing of iodinated contrast prevent
contrast-induced acute kidney injury? Circ Cardiovasc Interv 2010; 3: 346-350.

D

620.

621.

Laskey WK, Jenkins C, Selzer F, et al. Volume-to-creatinine clearance ratio: a
pharmacokinetically based risk factor for prediction of early creatinine increase after
percutaneous coronary intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 50: 584-590.

622.

Yuan N, Latif K, Botting PG, et al. Refining Safe Contrast Limits for Preventing Acute
Kidney Injury After Percutaneous Coronary Intervention. J Am Heart Assoc 2021; 10:
e018890.

623.

Brar SS, Aharonian V, Mansukhani P, et al. Haemodynamic-guided fluid administration
for the prevention of contrast-induced acute kidney injury: the POSEIDON randomised
controlled trial. Lancet 2014; 383: 1814-1823.

429

Qian G, Fu Z, Guo J, et al. Prevention of Contrast-Induced Nephropathy by Central
Venous Pressure-Guided Fluid Administration in Chronic Kidney Disease and
Congestive Heart Failure Patients. JACC Cardiovasc Interv 2016; 9: 89-96.

625.

Cai Q, Jing R, Zhang W, et al. Hydration Strategies for Preventing Contrast-Induced
Acute Kidney Injury: A Systematic Review and Bayesian Network Meta-Analysis. J
Interv Cardiol 2020; 2020: 7292675.

626.

Maioli M, Toso A, Leoncini M, et al. Bioimpedance-Guided Hydration for the
Prevention of Contrast-Induced Kidney Injury: The HYDRA Study. J Am Coll Cardiol
2018; 71: 2880-2889.

627.

Cossette F, Trifan A, Prevost-Marcotte G, et al. Tailored hydration for the prevention of
contrast-induced acute kidney injury after coronary angiogram or PCI: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Am Heart J 2025; 282: 93-102.

628.

Mirza AJ, Ali K, Huwez F, et al. Contrast Induced Nephropathy: Efficacy of matched
hydration and forced diuresis for prevention in patients with impaired renal function
undergoing coronary procedures-CINEMA trial. Int J Cardiol Heart Vasc 2022; 39:
100959.

629.

Weisbord SD, Gallagher M, Jneid H, et al. Outcomes after Angiography with Sodium
Bicarbonate and Acetylcysteine. N Engl J Med 2018; 378: 603-614.

630.

Valette X, Desmeulles I, Savary B, et al. Sodium Bicarbonate Versus Sodium Chloride
for Preventing Contrast-Associated Acute Kidney Injury in Critically Ill Patients: A
Randomized Controlled Trial. Crit Care Med 2017; 45: 637-644.

R

AF
T

624.

Jiang Y, Chen M, Zhang Y, et al. Meta-analysis of prophylactic hydration versus no
hydration on contrast-induced acute kidney injury. Coron Artery Dis 2017; 28: 649-657.

632.

Arslan S, Yildiz A, Dalgic Y, et al. Avoiding the emergence of contrast-induced acute
kidney injury in acute coronary syndrome: routine hydration treatment. Coron Artery Dis
2021; 32: 397-402.

633.

Nijssen EC, Rennenberg RJ, Nelemans PJ, et al. Prophylactic hydration to protect renal
function from intravascular iodinated contrast material in patients at high risk of contrastinduced nephropathy (AMACING): a prospective, randomised, phase 3, controlled, openlabel, non-inferiority trial. Lancet 2017; 389: 1312-1322.

634.

Weisbord SD, Gallagher M, Palevsky PM. Angiography with Sodium Bicarbonate and
Acetylcysteine. N Engl J Med 2018; 378: 1749.

635.

Adolph E, Holdt-Lehmann B, Chatterjee T, et al. Renal Insufficiency Following
Radiocontrast Exposure Trial (REINFORCE): a randomized comparison of sodium

D

631.

430

bicarbonate versus sodium chloride hydration for the prevention of contrast-induced
nephropathy. Coron Artery Dis 2008; 19: 413-419.
Brar SS, Shen AY, Jorgensen MB, et al. Sodium bicarbonate vs sodium chloride for the
prevention of contrast medium-induced nephropathy in patients undergoing coronary
angiography: a randomized trial. JAMA 2008; 300: 1038-1046.

637.

Castini D, Lucreziotti S, Bosotti L, et al. Prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy: a
single center randomized study. Clin Cardiol 2010; 33: E63-68.

638.

Gomes VO, Lasevitch R, Lima VC, et al. Hydration with sodium bicarbonate does not
prevent contrast nephropathy: a multicenter clinical trial. Arq Bras Cardiol 2012; 99:
1129-1134.

639.

Klima T, Christ A, Marana I, et al. Sodium chloride vs. sodium bicarbonate for the
prevention of contrast medium-induced nephropathy: a randomized controlled trial. Eur
Heart J 2012; 33: 2071-2079.

640.

Kooiman J, de Vries JPM, Van der Heyden J, et al. Randomized trial of one-hour sodium
bicarbonate vs standard periprocedural saline hydration in chronic kidney disease patients
undergoing cardiovascular contrast procedures. PLoS One 2018; 13: e0189372.

641.

Kooiman J, Sijpkens YW, de Vries JP, et al. A randomized comparison of 1-h sodium
bicarbonate hydration versus standard peri-procedural saline hydration in patients with
chronic kidney disease undergoing intravenous contrast-enhanced computerized
tomography. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2014; 29: 1029-1036.

R

AF
T

636.

Lee SW, Kim WJ, Kim YH, et al. Preventive strategies of renal insufficiency in patients
with diabetes undergoing intervention or arteriography (the PREVENT Trial). Am J
Cardiol 2011; 107: 1447-1452.

643.

Maioli M, Toso A, Leoncini M, et al. Sodium bicarbonate versus saline for the
prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy in patients with renal dysfunction undergoing
coronary angiography or intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol 2008; 52: 599-604.

644.

Manari A, Magnavacchi P, Puggioni E, et al. Acute kidney injury after primary
angioplasty: effect of different hydration treatments. J Cardiovasc Med (Hagerstown)
2014; 15: 60-67.

645.

Motohiro M, Kamihata H, Tsujimoto S, et al. A new protocol using sodium bicarbonate
for the prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy in patients undergoing coronary
angiography. Am J Cardiol 2011; 107: 1604-1608.

646.

Nieto-Rios JF, Salazar WA, Sanchez OM, et al. Prevention of contrast induced
nephropathy with sodium bicarbonate (the PROMEC study). J Bras Nefrol 2014; 36:
360-366.

D

642.

431

Thayssen P, Lassen JF, Jensen SE, et al. Prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy with
N-acetylcysteine or sodium bicarbonate in patients with ST-segment-myocardial
infarction: a prospective, randomized, open-labeled trial. Circ Cardiovasc Interv 2014; 7:
216-224.

648.

Yeganehkhah MR, Iranirad L, Dorri F, et al. Comparison between three supportive
treatments for prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy in high-risk patients
undergoing coronary angiography. Saudi J Kidney Dis Transpl 2014; 25: 1217-1223.

649.

Hoste EA, De Waele JJ, Gevaert SA, et al. Sodium bicarbonate for prevention of
contrast-induced acute kidney injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Nephrol
Dial Transplant 2010; 25: 747-758.

650.

Jang JS, Jin HY, Seo JS, et al. Sodium bicarbonate therapy for the prevention of contrastinduced acute kidney injury - a systematic review and meta-analysis. Circ J 2012; 76:
2255-2265.

651.

Soomro QH, Anand ST, Weisbord SD, et al. The Relationship between Rate and Volume
of Intravenous Fluid Administration and Kidney Outcomes after Angiography. Clin J Am
Soc Nephrol 2022; 17: 1446-1456.

652.

Alonso P, Sanz J, Garcia-Orts A, et al. Usefulness of Sodium Bicarbonate for the
Prevention of Contrast-Induced Nephropathy in Patients Undergoing Cardiac
Resynchronization Therapy. Am J Cardiol 2017; 120: 1584-1588.

653.

Cho R, Javed N, Traub D, et al. Oral hydration and alkalinization is noninferior to
intravenous therapy for prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy in patients with
chronic kidney disease. J Interv Cardiol 2010; 23: 460-466.

R

AF
T

647.

Hafiz AM, Jan MF, Mori N, et al. Prevention of contrast-induced acute kidney injury in
patients with stable chronic renal disease undergoing elective percutaneous coronary and
peripheral interventions: randomized comparison of two preventive strategies. Catheter
Cardiovasc Interv 2012; 79: 929-937.

D

654.

655.

Koc F, Ozdemir K, Altunkas F, et al. Sodium bicarbonate versus isotonic saline for the
prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy in patients with diabetes mellitus undergoing
coronary angiography and/or intervention: a multicenter prospective randomized study. J
Investig Med 2013; 61: 872-877.

656.

Mahmoodi K, Sohrabi B, Ilkhchooyi F, et al. The Efficacy of Hydration with Normal
Saline Versus Hydration with Sodium Bicarbonate in the Prevention of Contrast-induced
Nephropathy. Heart Views 2014; 15: 33-36.

432

Maioli M, Toso A, Leoncini M, et al. Effects of hydration in contrast-induced acute
kidney injury after primary angioplasty: a randomized, controlled trial. Circ Cardiovasc
Interv 2011; 4: 456-462.

658.

Masuda M, Yamada T, Mine T, et al. Comparison of usefulness of sodium bicarbonate
versus sodium chloride to prevent contrast-induced nephropathy in patients undergoing
an emergent coronary procedure. Am J Cardiol 2007; 100: 781-786.

659.

Merten GJ, Burgess WP, Gray LV, et al. Prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy
with sodium bicarbonate: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2004; 291: 2328-2334.

660.

Ozcan EE, Guneri S, Akdeniz B, et al. Sodium bicarbonate, N-acetylcysteine, and saline
for prevention of radiocontrast-induced nephropathy. A comparison of 3 regimens for
protecting contrast-induced nephropathy in patients undergoing coronary procedures. A
single-center prospective controlled trial. Am Heart J 2007; 154: 539-544.

661.

Pakfetrat M, Nikoo MH, Malekmakan L, et al. A comparison of sodium bicarbonate
infusion versus normal saline infusion and its combination with oral acetazolamide for
prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy: a randomized, double-blind trial. Int Urol
Nephrol 2009; 41: 629-634.

662.

Recio-Mayoral A, Chaparro M, Prado B, et al. The reno-protective effect of hydration
with sodium bicarbonate plus N-acetylcysteine in patients undergoing emergency
percutaneous coronary intervention: the RENO Study. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 49:
1283-1288.

663.

Solomon R, Gordon P, Manoukian SV, et al. Randomized Trial of Bicarbonate or Saline
Study for the Prevention of Contrast-Induced Nephropathy in Patients with CKD. Clin J
Am Soc Nephrol 2015; 10: 1519-1524.

R

AF
T

657.

van Mourik MS, van Kesteren F, Planken RN, et al. Short versus conventional hydration
for prevention of kidney injury during pre-TAVI computed tomography angiography.
Neth Heart J 2018; 26: 425-432.

D

664.

665.

Yang K, Liu W, Ren W, et al. Different interventions in preventing contrast-induced
nephropathy after percutaneous coronary intervention. Int Urol Nephrol 2014; 46: 18011807.

666.

Dussol B, Morange S, Loundoun A, et al. A randomized trial of saline hydration to
prevent contrast nephropathy in chronic renal failure patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant
2006; 21: 2120-2126.

667.

Majumdar SR, Kjellstrand CM, Tymchak WJ, et al. Forced euvolemic diuresis with
mannitol and furosemide for prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy in patients with
CKD undergoing coronary angiography: a randomized controlled trial. Am J Kidney Dis
2009; 54: 602-609.
433

Solomon R, Werner C, Mann D, et al. Effects of saline, mannitol, and furosemide on
acute decreases in renal function induced by radiocontrast agents. N Engl J Med 1994;
331: 1416-1420.

669.

Hu M, Yan G, Tang H, et al. Effect of Combining Furosemide With Standard Hydration
Therapy on Contrast-Induced Acute Kidney Injury Following Coronary Angiography or
Intervention in a High-Risk Population. Angiology 2021; 72: 138-144.

670.

Macdonald DB, Hurrell CD, Costa AF, et al. Canadian Association of Radiologists
Guidance on Contrast-Associated Acute Kidney Injury. Can J Kidney Health Dis 2022;
9: 20543581221097455.

671.

Prasad A, Palevsky PM, Bansal S, et al. Management of Patients With Kidney Disease in
Need of Cardiovascular Catheterization: A Scientific Workshop Cosponsored by the
National Kidney Foundation and the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and
Interventions. Journal of the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography & Interventions
2022; 1: 100445.

672.

Sebastia C, Paez-Carpio A, Guillen E, et al. Oral hydration as a safe prophylactic
measure to prevent post-contrast acute kidney injury in oncologic patients with chronic
kidney disease (IIIb) referred for contrast-enhanced computed tomography: subanalysis
of the oncological group of the NICIR study. Support Care Cancer 2022; 30: 1879-1887.

673.

Bainey KR, Rahim S, Etherington K, et al. Effects of withdrawing vs continuing reninangiotensin blockers on incidence of acute kidney injury in patients with renal
insufficiency undergoing cardiac catheterization: Results from the Angiotensin
Converting Enzyme Inhibitor/Angiotensin Receptor Blocker and Contrast Induced
Nephropathy in Patients Receiving Cardiac Catheterization (CAPTAIN) trial. Am Heart J
2015; 170: 110-116.

R

AF
T

668.

Lin Y, Dong S, Liu Y, et al. Renal Safety and Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System
Inhibitors in Patients With Contrast Media Exposure: A Multicenter Randomized
Controlled Study. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol 2022; 80: 718-724.

D

674.

675.

Rosenstock JL, Bruno R, Kim JK, et al. The effect of withdrawal of ACE inhibitors or
angiotensin receptor blockers prior to coronary angiography on the incidence of contrastinduced nephropathy. Int Urol Nephrol 2008; 40: 749-755.

676.

Wolak T, Aliev E, Rogachev B, et al. Renal safety and angiotensin II blockade
medications in patients undergoing non-emergent coronary angiography: a randomized
controlled study. Isr Med Assoc J 2013; 15: 682-687.

677.

Legrand M, Falcone J, Cholley B, et al. Continuation vs Discontinuation of ReninAngiotensin System Inhibitors Before Major Noncardiac Surgery: The Stop-or-Not
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2024; 332: 970-978.
434

Ahmed M, Fatima E, Shafiq A, et al. Continuation versus discontinuation of reninangiotensin aldosterone system inhibitors before non-cardiac surgery: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. J Clin Anesth 2024; 99: 111679.

679.

Ackland GL, Patel A, Abbott TEF, et al. Discontinuation vs. continuation of reninangiotensin system inhibition before non-cardiac surgery: the SPACE trial. Eur Heart J
2024; 45: 1146-1155.

680.

Coca A, Bustamante-Munguira E, Fidalgo V, et al. EValuating the Effect of
periopeRaTIve empaGliflOzin on cardiac surgery associated acute kidney injury:
rationale and design of the VERTIGO study. Clin Kidney J 2024; 17: sfae229.

681.

Antoniak DT, Walters RW, Alla VM. Impact of Renin-Angiotensin System Blockers on
Mortality in Veterans Undergoing Cardiac Surgery. J Am Heart Assoc 2021; 10:
e019731.

682.

Yacoub R, Patel N, Lohr JW, et al. Acute kidney injury and death associated with renin
angiotensin system blockade in cardiothoracic surgery: a meta-analysis of observational
studies. Am J Kidney Dis 2013; 62: 1077-1086.

683.

van Diepen S, Norris CM, Zheng Y, et al. Comparison of Angiotensin-Converting
Enzyme Inhibitor and Angiotensin Receptor Blocker Management Strategies Before
Cardiac Surgery: A Pilot Randomized Controlled Registry Trial. J Am Heart Assoc 2018;
7: e009917.

684.

Fink JC, Maguire RM, Blakeman T, et al. Medication Holds in CKD During Acute
Volume-Depleting Illnesses: A Randomized Controlled Trial of a "Sick-Day" Protocol.
Kidney Med 2022; 4: 100527.

R

AF
T

678.

Lee MMY, Kondo T, Campbell RT, et al. Effects of renin-angiotensin system blockers
on outcomes from COVID-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Pharmacother 2024; 10: 68-80.

D

685.

686.

Liu Q, Fu W, Zhu CJ, et al. Effect of continuing the use of renin-angiotensin system
inhibitors on mortality in patients hospitalized for coronavirus disease 2019: a systematic
review, meta-analysis, and meta-regression analysis. BMC Infect Dis 2023; 23: 53.

687.

Lopes RD, Macedo AVS, de Barros ESPGM, et al. Effect of Discontinuing vs
Continuing Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors and Angiotensin II Receptor
Blockers on Days Alive and Out of the Hospital in Patients Admitted With COVID-19: A
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2021; 325: 254-264.

688.

Najmeddin F, Solhjoo M, Ashraf H, et al. Effects of Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone
Inhibitors on Early Outcomes of Hypertensive COVID-19 Patients: A Randomized
Triple-Blind Clinical Trial. Am J Hypertens 2021; 34: 1217-1226.
435

Sharma A, Elharram M, Afilalo J, et al. A randomized controlled trial of reninangiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitor management in patients admitted in hospital
with COVID-19. Am Heart J 2022; 247: 76-89.

690.

Watson KE, Dhaliwal K, Robertshaw S, et al. Consensus Recommendations for Sick Day
Medication Guidance for People With Diabetes, Kidney, or Cardiovascular Disease: A
Modified Delphi Process. Am J Kidney Dis 2023; 81: 564-574.

691.

Duong H, Tesfaye W, Van C, et al. Hospitalisation Due to Community-Acquired Acute
Kidney Injury and the Role of Medications: A Retrospective Audit. J Clin Med 2023; 12:
3347.

692.

Watson KE, Dhaliwal K, McMurtry E, et al. Sick Day Medication Guidance for People
With Diabetes, Kidney Disease, or Cardiovascular Disease: A Systematic Scoping
Review. Kidney Med 2022; 4: 100491.

693.

Slagle CL, Hemmelgarn T, Gavigan HW, et al. Use of urine neutrophil gelatinaseassociated lipocalin for nephrotoxic medication acute kidney injury screening in
neonates. J Perinatol 2024; 44: 1780-1785.

694.

van Donge T, Welzel T, Atkinson A, et al. Age-Dependent Changes of Kidney Injury
Biomarkers in Pediatrics. J Clin Pharmacol 2019; 59 Suppl 1: S21-S32.

695.

Hoste EA, Bagshaw SM, Bellomo R, et al. Epidemiology of acute kidney injury in
critically ill patients: the multinational AKI-EPI study. Intensive Care Med 2015; 41:
1411-1423.

R

AF
T

689.

Kolhe NV, Fluck RJ, Muirhead AW, et al. Regional Variation in Acute Kidney Injury
Requiring Dialysis in the English National Health Service from 2000 to 2015 - A
National Epidemiological Study. PLoS One 2016; 11: e0162856.

D

696.

697.

Wald R, McArthur E, Adhikari NK, et al. Changing incidence and outcomes following
dialysis-requiring acute kidney injury among critically ill adults: a population-based
cohort study. Am J Kidney Dis 2015; 65: 870-877.

698.

Kon AA, Davidson JE, Morrison W, et al. Shared Decision Making in ICUs: An
American College of Critical Care Medicine and American Thoracic Society Policy
Statement. Crit Care Med 2016; 44: 188-201.

699.

Engels N, de Graav GN, van der Nat P, et al. Shared decision-making in advanced kidney
disease: a scoping review. BMJ Open 2022; 12: e055248.

700.

Bhatt MT, Chaudhuri S, Ravindranath S, et al. Impact of Shared Decision-Making on
Family Satisfaction With Intensive Care Services: 'Share With Care' has a New Meaning
in ICU. Am J Hosp Palliat Care 2025; 42: 889-898.
436

Kawarazaki H, Uchino S, Tokuhira N, et al. Who may not benefit from continuous renal
replacement therapy in acute kidney injury? Hemodial Int 2013; 17: 624-632.

702.

Kee YK, Kim D, Kim SJ, et al. Factors Associated with Early Mortality in Critically Ill
Patients Following the Initiation of Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy. J Clin Med
2018; 7.

703.

Diaz PM, Saly DL, Horick N, et al. Prognosis of Transplant-Ineligible Patients with
Cirrhosis and Acute Kidney Injury Who Initiate Renal Replacement Therapy. Dig Dis Sci
2024; 69: 3710-3720.

704.

Allegretti AS, Parada XV, Eneanya ND, et al. Prognosis of Patients with Cirrhosis and
AKI Who Initiate RRT. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2018; 13: 16-25.

705.

Kruser JM, Nadig NR, Viglianti EM, et al. Time-Limited Trials for Patients With Critical
Illness: A Review of the Literature. Chest 2024; 165: 881-891.

706.

Kruser JM, Ashana DC, Courtright KR, et al. Defining the Time-limited Trial for
Patients with Critical Illness: An Official American Thoracic Society Workshop Report.
Ann Am Thorac Soc 2024; 21: 187-199.

707.

Chang DW, Neville TH, Parrish J, et al. Evaluation of Time-Limited Trials Among
Critically Ill Patients With Advanced Medical Illnesses and Reduction of Nonbeneficial
ICU Treatments. JAMA Intern Med 2021; 181: 786-794.

708.

Mehta RL, Cerda J, Burdmann EA, et al. International Society of Nephrology's 0by25
initiative for acute kidney injury (zero preventable deaths by 2025): a human rights case
for nephrology. Lancet 2015; 385: 2616-2643.

709.

Olowu WA, Niang A, Osafo C, et al. Outcomes of acute kidney injury in children and
adults in sub-Saharan Africa: a systematic review. Lancet Glob Health 2016; 4: e242250.

D

R

AF
T

701.

710.

Zheng M, Zhang YH, Cao Y, et al. Development of a Decision Aid for Family Surrogate
Decision Makers of Critically Ill Patients Requiring Renal Replacement Therapy in ICU:
A User-Centered Design for Rapid Prototyping. Chin Med Sci J 2024; 39: 91-101.

711.

Gaudry S, Hajage D, Martin-Lefevre L, et al. The Artificial Kidney Initiation in Kidney
Injury 2 (AKIKI2): study protocol for a randomized controlled trial. Trials 2019; 20: 726.

712.

Gaudry S, Hajage D, Schortgen F, et al. Initiation Strategies for Renal-Replacement
Therapy in the Intensive Care Unit. N Engl J Med 2016.

437

STARRT-AKI Investigators, Canadian Critical Care Trials Group tA, New Zealand
Intensive Care Society Clinical Trials Group tUKCCRGtCNTN, et al. Timing of
Initiation of Renal-Replacement Therapy in Acute Kidney Injury. N Engl J Med 2020;
383: 240-251.

714.

Gaudry S, Hajage D, Benichou N, et al. Delayed versus early initiation of renal
replacement therapy for severe acute kidney injury: a systematic review and individual
patient data meta-analysis of randomised clinical trials. Lancet 2020; 395: 1506-1515.

715.

Nadim MK, Forni LG, Bihorac A, et al. Cardiac and Vascular Surgery-Associated Acute
Kidney Injury: The 20th International Consensus Conference of the ADQI (Acute
Disease Quality Initiative) Group. J Am Heart Assoc 2018; 7: e008834.

716.

Zou H, Hong Q, Xu G. Early versus late initiation of renal replacement therapy impacts
mortality in patients with acute kidney injury post cardiac surgery: a meta-analysis. Crit
Care 2017; 21: 150.

717.

Liu Y, Davari-Farid S, Arora P, et al. Early versus late initiation of renal replacement
therapy in critically ill patients with acute kidney injury after cardiac surgery: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2014; 28: 557-563.

718.

Combes A, Brechot N, Amour J, et al. Early High-Volume Hemofiltration versus
Standard Care for Post-Cardiac Surgery Shock. The HEROICS Study. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 2015; 192: 1179-1190.

719.

Durmaz I, Yagdi T, Calkavur T, et al. Prophylactic dialysis in patients with renal
dysfunction undergoing on-pump coronary artery bypass surgery. Ann Thorac Surg 2003;
75: 859-864.

R

AF
T

713.

Elahi MM, Lim MY, Joseph RN, et al. Early hemofiltration improves survival in postcardiotomy patients with acute renal failure. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2004; 26: 10271031.

D

720.

721.

Garcia-Fernandez N, Perez-Valdivieso JR, Bes-Rastrollo M, et al. Timing of renal
replacement therapy after cardiac surgery: a retrospective multicenter Spanish cohort
study. Blood Purif 2011; 32: 104-111.

722.

Sugahara S, Suzuki H. Early start on continuous hemodialysis therapy improves survival
rate in patients with acute renal failure following coronary bypass surgery. Hemodial Int
2004; 8: 320-325.

723.

Iyem H, Tavli M, Akcicek F, et al. Importance of early dialysis for acute renal failure
after an open-heart surgery. Hemodial Int 2009; 13: 55-61.

438

Crescenzi G, Torracca L, Pierri MD, et al. 'Early' and 'late' timing for renal replacement
therapy in acute kidney injury after cardiac surgery: a prospective, interventional,
controlled, single-centre trial. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 2015; 20: 616-621.

725.

Ostermann M, Bagshaw SM, Lumlertgul N, et al. Indications for and Timing of Initiation
of KRT. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2023; 18: 113-120.

726.

Elsharkawy AM, Naga YS, Megahed MM, et al. Furosemide Stress test guided early
versus late renal Replacement therapy in mechanically ventilated patients with acute
kidney injury. Alexandria Journal of Medicine 2024; 60: 138-146.

727.

Jiao R, Lu X, Liu M, et al. Randomized Trial of Early vs Standard Renal Replacement
Therapy in Patients With Acute Kidney Injury After Type A Aortic Dissection. Ann
Thorac Surg 2025; 120: 17-24.

728.

Li JH, Cai JH, Wang MJ, et al. Early strategy vs. late initiation of renal replacement
therapy in adult patients with acute kidney injury: an updated systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 2023; 27:
6046-6057.

729.

Srisawat N, Laoveeravat P, Limphunudom P, et al. The effect of early renal replacement
therapy guided by plasma neutrophil gelatinase associated lipocalin on outcome of acute
kidney injury: A feasibility study. J Crit Care 2018; 43: 36-41.

730.

Liborio AB, Leite TT, Neves FM, et al. AKI complications in critically ill patients:
association with mortality rates and RRT. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2015; 10: 21-28.

R

AF
T

724.

Rambaud T, Hajage D, Dreyfuss D, et al. Renal replacement therapy initiation strategies
in comatose patients with severe acute kidney injury: a secondary analysis of a
multicenter randomized controlled trial. Intensive Care Med 2024; 50: 385-394.

732.

Gist KM, Menon S, Anton-Martin P, et al. Time to Continuous Renal Replacement
Therapy Initiation and 90-Day Major Adverse Kidney Events in Children and Young
Adults. JAMA Netw Open 2024; 7: e2349871.

733.

Rodenas-Alesina E, Wang VN, Brahmbhatt DH, et al. CALL-K score: predicting the
need for renal replacement therapy in cardiogenic shock. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc
Care 2022; 11: 377-385.

734.

Lertjitbanjong P, Thongprayoon C, Cheungpasitporn W, et al. Acute Kidney Injury after
Lung Transplantation: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. J Clin Med 2019; 8:
1713.

735.

Wang L, Wang T, Rushton SN, et al. The impact of severe acute kidney injury requiring
renal replacement therapy on survival and renal function of heart transplant recipients - a
UK cohort study. Transpl Int 2020; 33: 1650-1666.

D

731.

439

Mitra S, Ling RR, Tan CS, et al. Concurrent Use of Renal Replacement Therapy during
Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation Support: A Systematic Review and MetaAnalysis. J Clin Med 2021; 10: 241.

737.

Ahlstrom A, Tallgren M, Peltonen S, et al. Survival and quality of life of patients
requiring acute renal replacement therapy. Intensive Care Med 2005; 31: 1222-1228.

738.

Maynard SE, Whittle J, Chelluri L, et al. Quality of life and dialysis decisions in
critically ill patients with acute renal failure. Intensive Care Med 2003; 29: 1589-1593.

739.

Oeyen S, De Corte W, Benoit D, et al. Long-term quality of life in critically ill patients
with acute kidney injury treated with renal replacement therapy: a matched cohort study.
Crit Care 2015; 19: 289.

740.

Villeneuve PM, Clark EG, Sikora L, et al. Health-related quality-of-life among survivors
of acute kidney injury in the intensive care unit: a systematic review. Intensive Care Med
2016; 42: 137-146.

741.

Wald R, Beaubien-Souligny W, Chanchlani R, et al. Delivering optimal renal
replacement therapy to critically ill patients with acute kidney injury. Intensive Care Med
2022; 48: 1368-1381.

742.

Disease Control Priorities: Improving Health and Reducing Poverty. Volume 9.
Washington, DC: World Bank, vol. 9. World Bank: Washington, DC, 2018.

743.

Opgenorth D, Bagshaw SM, Lau V, et al. A study protocol for improving the delivery of
acute kidney replacement therapy (KRT) to critically ill patients in Alberta DIALYZING WISELY. BMC Nephrol 2022; 23: 369.

744.

Rhee H, Park M, Kim IY. Nephrology consultation improves the clinical outcomes of
patients with acute kidney injury. Kidney Res Clin Pract 2025; 44: 102-110.

D

R

AF
T

736.

745.

Ponce D, Zorzenon Cde P, dos Santos NY, et al. Early nephrology consultation can have
an impact on outcome of acute kidney injury patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2011; 26:
3202-3206.

746.

Mehta RL, McDonald B, Gabbai F, et al. Nephrology consultation in acute renal failure:
does timing matter? Am J Med 2002; 113: 456-461.

747.

Costa e Silva VT, Liano F, Muriel A, et al. Nephrology referral and outcomes in
critically ill acute kidney injury patients. PLoS One 2013; 8: e70482.

440

Kirwan CJ, Blunden MJ, Dobbie H, et al. Critically ill patients requiring acute renal
replacement therapy are at an increased risk of long-term renal dysfunction, but rarely
receive specialist nephrology follow-up. Nephron 2015; 129: 164-170.

749.

Vinsonneau C, Allain-Launay E, Blayau C, et al. Renal replacement therapy in adult and
pediatric intensive care : Recommendations by an expert panel from the French Intensive
Care Society (SRLF) with the French Society of Anesthesia Intensive Care (SFAR)
French Group for Pediatric Intensive Care Emergencies (GFRUP) the French Dialysis
Society (SFD). Ann Intensive Care 2015; 5: 58.

750.

Vaara ST, Reinikainen M, Wald R, et al. Timing of RRT based on the presence of
conventional indications. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2014; 9: 1577-1585.

751.

Slack AJ, Auzinger G, Willars C, et al. Ammonia clearance with haemofiltration in
adults with liver disease. Liver Int 2014; 34: 42-48.

752.

Cardoso FS, Gottfried M, Tujios S, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy is
associated with reduced serum ammonia levels and mortality in acute liver failure.
Hepatology 2018; 67: 711-720.

753.

MacDonald AJ, Speiser JL, Ganger DR, et al. Clinical and Neurologic Outcomes in
Acetaminophen-Induced Acute Liver Failure: A 21-Year Multicenter Cohort Study. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021; 19: 2615-2625 e2613.

754.

Warrillow S, Fisher C, Tibballs H, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy and its
impact on hyperammonaemia in acute liver failure. Crit Care Resusc 2020; 22: 158-165.

R

AF
T

748.

Shingina A, Mukhtar N, Wakim-Fleming J, et al. Acute Liver Failure Guidelines. Am J
Gastroenterol 2023; 118: 1128-1153.

756.

Ostermann M, Zarbock A, Goldstein S, et al. Recommendations on Acute Kidney Injury
Biomarkers From the Acute Disease Quality Initiative Consensus Conference: A
Consensus Statement. JAMA Netw Open 2020; 3: e2019209.

D

755.

757.

Fernandez S, Santiago MJ, Gonzalez R, et al. Hemodynamic impact of the connection to
continuous renal replacement therapy in critically ill children. Pediatr Nephrol 2019; 34:
163-168.

758.

Thadani S, Fuhrman D, Hanson C, et al. Patterns of Multiple Organ Dysfunction and
Renal Recovery in Critically Ill Children and Young Adults Receiving Continuous Renal
Replacement Therapy. Crit Care Explor 2024; 6: e1084.

759.

Santiago MJ, Lopez-Herce J, Urbano J, et al. Complications of continuous renal
replacement therapy in critically ill children: a prospective observational evaluation
study. Crit Care 2009; 13: R184.
441

Silversides JA, Pinto R, Kuint R, et al. Fluid balance, intradialytic hypotension, and
outcomes in critically ill patients undergoing renal replacement therapy: a cohort study.
Crit Care 2014; 18: 624.

761.

Douvris A, Malhi G, Hiremath S, et al. Interventions to prevent hemodynamic instability
during renal replacement therapy in critically ill patients: a systematic review. Crit Care
2018; 22: 41.

762.

Thadani S, Fogarty T, Mottes T, et al. Hemodynamic instability during connection to
continuous kidney replacement therapy in critically ill pediatric patients. Pediatr Nephrol
2022; 37: 2167-2177.

763.

Srisawat N, Lawsin L, Uchino S, et al. Cost of acute renal replacement therapy in the
intensive care unit: results from The Beginning and Ending Supportive Therapy for the
Kidney (BEST Kidney) study. Crit Care 2010; 14: R46.

764.

Ye Z, Wang Y, Ge L, et al. Comparing Renal Replacement Therapy Modalities in
Critically Ill Patients With Acute Kidney Injury: A Systematic Review and Network
Meta-Analysis. Crit Care Explor 2021; 3: e0399.

765.

Parapiboon W, Tatiyanupanwong S, Khositrangsikun K, et al. Lower-Dosage Acute
Peritoneal Dialysis versus Acute Intermittent Hemodialysis in Acute Kidney Injury: A
Randomized Controlled Trial. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2024; 19: 970-977.

766.

Phu NH, Hien TT, Mai NT, et al. Hemofiltration and peritoneal dialysis in infectionassociated acute renal failure in Vietnam. N Engl J Med 2002; 347: 895-902.

R

AF
T

760.

Al-Hwiesh A, Abdul-Rahman I, Finkelstein F, et al. Acute Kidney Injury in Critically Ill
Patients: A Prospective Randomized Study of Tidal Peritoneal Dialysis Versus
Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy. Ther Apher Dial 2018; 22: 371-379.

D

767.

768.

Gabriel DP, Caramori JT, Martim LC, et al. High volume peritoneal dialysis vs daily
hemodialysis: a randomized, controlled trial in patients with acute kidney injury. Kidney
Int Suppl 2008: S87-93.

769.

Gabriel DP, Caramori JT, Martin LC, et al. Continuous peritoneal dialysis compared with
daily hemodialysis in patients with acute kidney injury. Perit Dial Int 2009; 29 Suppl 2:
S62-71.

770.

Ponce D, Berbel MN, Abrao JM, et al. A randomized clinical trial of high volume
peritoneal dialysis versus extended daily hemodialysis for acute kidney injury patients.
Int Urol Nephrol 2013; 45: 869-878.

771.

Liu L, Zhang L, Liu GJ, et al. Peritoneal dialysis for acute kidney injury. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2017; 12: CD011457.
442

Chionh CY, Soni SS, Finkelstein FO, et al. Use of peritoneal dialysis in AKI: a
systematic review. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2013; 8: 1649-1660.

773.

Panaput T, Peerapornratana S, Sirivongrangson P, et al. Modalities of renal replacement
therapy and clinical outcomes of patients with acute kidney injury in a resource-limited
setting: Results from a SEA-AKI study. J Crit Care 2021; 65: 18-25.

774.

Ponce D, Berbel MN, Regina de Goes C, et al. High-volume peritoneal dialysis in acute
kidney injury: indications and limitations. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2012; 7: 887-894.

775.

Ponce D, Caramori JT, Barretti P, et al. Peritoneal dialysis in acute kidney injury:
Brazilian experience. Perit Dial Int 2012; 32: 242-246.

776.

Cullis B, Al-Hwiesh A, Kilonzo K, et al. ISPD guidelines for peritoneal dialysis in acute
kidney injury: 2020 update (adults). Perit Dial Int 2021; 41: 15-31.

777.

George J, Varma S, Kumar S, et al. Comparing continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration
and peritoneal dialysis in critically ill patients with acute kidney injury: a pilot study.
Perit Dial Int 2011; 31: 422-429.

778.

Ferraris JR, Luxardo R, Eymann AM, et al. Quality of life and social characteristics of
young adults in chronic hemodialysis with pediatric-onset renal disease. Arch Argent
Pediatr 2025; 123: e202410555.

779.

Mayer KP, Ortiz-Soriano VM, Kalantar A, et al. Acute kidney injury contributes to
worse physical and quality of life outcomes in survivors of critical illness. BMC Nephrol
2022; 23: 137.

R

AF
T

772.

Martino FK, Campo D, Stefanelli LF, et al. The Quality of Life in Elderly Patients in
Comprehensive Conservative Management or Hemodialysis: A Case-Control Study in
Analogous Basal Conditions. Nutrients 2024; 16: 3037.

D

780.

781.

Samoudi AF, Marzouq MK, Samara AM, et al. The impact of pain on the quality of life
of patients with end-stage renal disease undergoing hemodialysis: a multicenter crosssectional study from Palestine. Health Qual Life Outcomes 2021; 19: 39.

782.

Chiang CK, Peng YS, Chiang SS, et al. Health-related quality of life of hemodialysis
patients in Taiwan: a multicenter study. Blood Purif 2004; 22: 490-498.

783.

Farese S, Jakob SM, Kalicki R, et al. Treatment of acute renal failure in the intensive care
unit: lower costs by intermittent dialysis than continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration.
Artif Organs 2009; 33: 634-640.

443

Klarenbach S, Manns B, Pannu N, et al. Economic evaluation of continuous renal
replacement therapy in acute renal failure. Int J Technol Assess Health Care 2009; 25:
331-338.

785.

Singh A, Hussain S, Kher V, et al. A systematic review of cost-effectiveness analyses of
continuous versus intermittent renal replacement therapy in acute kidney injury. Expert
Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res 2022; 22: 27-35.

786.

Ethgen O, Murugan R, Echeverri J, et al. Economic Analysis of Renal Replacement
Therapy Modality in Acute Kidney Injury Patients With Fluid Overload. Crit Care
Explor 2023; 5: e0921.

787.

Manns B, Doig CJ, Lee H, et al. Cost of acute renal failure requiring dialysis in the
intensive care unit: clinical and resource implications of renal recovery. Crit Care Med
2003; 31: 449-455.

788.

Smoyer WE, Finkelstein FO, McCulloch M, et al. Saving Young Lives: provision of
acute dialysis in low-resource settings. Lancet 2015; 386: 2056.

789.

McCulloch MI, Argent AC, Morrow B, et al. Lessons learned from regional training of
paediatric nephrology fellows in Africa. Pediatr Nephrol 2023; 38: 3757-3768.

790.

Smoyer WE, Finkelstein FO, McCulloch MI, et al. "Saving Young Lives" with acute
kidney injury: the challenge of acute dialysis in low-resource settings. Kidney Int 2016;
89: 254-256.

791.

Kashani K, Rosner MH, Haase M, et al. Quality Improvement Goals for Acute Kidney
Injury. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2019; 14: 941-953.

792.

Davenport A. Renal replacement therapy in the patient with acute brain injury. Am J
Kidney Dis 2001; 37: 457-466.

D

R

AF
T

784.

793.

Davenport A. Continuous renal replacement therapies in patients with liver disease.
Semin Dial 2009; 22: 169-172.

794.

Davenport A. Continuous renal replacement therapies in patients with acute neurological
injury. Semin Dial 2009; 22: 165-168.

795.

Bagshaw SM, Peets AD, Hameed M, et al. Dialysis Disequilibrium Syndrome: brain
death following hemodialysis for metabolic acidosis and acute renal failure--a case
report. BMC Nephrol 2004; 5: 9.

796.

Lin CM, Lin JW, Tsai JT, et al. Intracranial pressure fluctuation during hemodialysis in
renal failure patients with intracranial hemorrhage. Acta Neurochir Suppl 2008; 101: 141144.
444

Ronco C, Bellomo R, Brendolan A, et al. Brain density changes during renal replacement
in critically ill patients with acute renal failure. Continuous hemofiltration versus
intermittent hemodialysis. J Nephrol 1999; 12: 173-178.

798.

da Hora Passos R, Coelho FO, Caldas JR, et al. Predicting intradialytic hypotension in
critically ill patients undergoing intermittent hemodialysis: a prospective observational
study. Intensive Care Med Exp 2024; 12: 82.

799.

Lyrio RMC, Macedo E, Murugan R, et al. Predictors of intradialytic hypotension in
critically ill patients undergoing kidney replacement therapy: a systematic review.
Intensive Care Med Exp 2024; 12: 106.

800.

Mostafa H, Shaban M, Hasanin A, et al. Evaluation of peripheral perfusion index and
heart rate variability as early predictors for intradialytic hypotension in critically ill
patients. BMC Anesthesiol 2019; 19: 242.

801.

Schortgen F, Soubrier N, Delclaux C, et al. Hemodynamic tolerance of intermittent
hemodialysis in critically ill patients: usefulness of practice guidelines. Am J Respir Crit
Care Med 2000; 162: 197-202.

802.

K/DOQI Workgroup. K/DOQI clinical practice guidelines for cardiovascular disease in
dialysis patients. Am J Kidney Dis 2005; 45: S1-153.

803.

Kanbay M, Ertuglu LA, Afsar B, et al. An update review of intradialytic hypotension:
concept, risk factors, clinical implications and management. Clin Kidney J 2020; 13: 981993.

R

AF
T

797.

Macedo E, Karl B, Lee E, et al. A randomized trial of albumin infusion to prevent
intradialytic hypotension in hospitalized hypoalbuminemic patients. Crit Care 2021; 25:
18.

D

804.

805.

Clark E: ALbumin To Enhance Recovery from severe Acute Kidney Injury (ALTERAKI). In (vol 2025), edited by ClinicalTrials.gov, Washington, D.C., National Library of
Medicine, 2024

806.

Dalbhi SA, Alorf R, Alotaibi M, et al. Sustained low efficiency dialysis is non-inferior to
continuous renal replacement therapy in critically ill patients with acute kidney injury: A
comparative meta-analysis. Medicine (Baltimore) 2021; 100: e28118.

807.

Kovacs B, Sullivan KJ, Hiremath S, et al. Effect of sustained low efficient dialysis versus
continuous renal replacement therapy on renal recovery after acute kidney injury in the
intensive care unit: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Nephrology (Carlton) 2017;
22: 343-353.

445

Zhang L, Yang J, Eastwood GM, et al. Extended Daily Dialysis Versus Continuous
Renal Replacement Therapy for Acute Kidney Injury: A Meta-analysis. Am J Kidney Dis
2015; 66: 322-330.

809.

Beaubien-Souligny W, Yang Y, Burns KEA, et al. Intra-dialytic hypotension following
the transition from continuous to intermittent renal replacement therapy. Ann Intensive
Care 2021; 11: 96.

810.

Kim SG, Yun D, Lee J, et al. Impact of intradialytic hypotension on mortality following
the transition from continuous renal replacement therapy to intermittent hemodialysis.
Acute Crit Care 2023; 38: 86-94.

811.

Valdenebro M, Portoles J, Serrano Salazar ML, et al. Transitions and Long-Term Clinical
Outcomes in Patients Admitted in Intensive Care Units Receiving Continuous Renal
Replacement Therapy. J Clin Med 2024; 13: 5085.

812.

Wang Y, Gallagher M, Li Q, et al. Renal replacement therapy intensity for acute kidney
injury and recovery to dialysis independence: a systematic review and individual patient
data meta-analysis. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2018; 33: 1017-1024.

813.

Mc Causland FR, Asafu-Adjei J, Betensky RA, et al. Comparison of Urine Output among
Patients Treated with More Intensive Versus Less Intensive RRT: Results from the Acute
Renal Failure Trial Network Study. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2016; 11: 1335-1342.

814.

Serpa Neto A, Naorungroj T, Gallagher M, et al. Impact of Intensity of Continuous Renal
Replacement Therapy on Duration of Ventilation in Critically Ill Patients: A Secondary
Analysis of the RENAL Trial. Blood Purif 2023; 52: 888-897.

R

AF
T

808.

RENAL, Bellomo R, Cass A, et al. Intensity of continuous renal-replacement therapy in
critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 2009; 361: 1627-1638.

816.

Sharma S, Kelly YP, Palevsky PM, et al. Intensity of Renal Replacement Therapy and
Duration of Mechanical Ventilation: Secondary Analysis of the Acute Renal Failure Trial
Network Study. Chest 2020; 158: 1473-1481.

817.

Fayad AI, Buamscha DG, Ciapponi A. Intensity of continuous renal replacement therapy
for acute kidney injury. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2016; 10: CD010613.

818.

Jun M, Heerspink HJ, Ninomiya T, et al. Intensities of renal replacement therapy in acute
kidney injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2010; 5:
956-963.

819.

Tolwani AJ, Campbell RC, Stofan BS, et al. Standard versus high-dose CVVHDF for
ICU-related acute renal failure. J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 19: 1233-1238.

D

815.

446

VA/NIH ATN, Palevsky PM, Zhang JH, et al. Intensity of renal support in critically ill
patients with acute kidney injury. N Engl J Med 2008; 359: 7-20.

821.

Yagi K, Fujii T, Kageyama A, et al. The Effects of Early-Phase, Low- or StandardIntensity Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy on Acid-Base Control and Clinical
Outcomes: An Observational Study. Blood Purif 2024; 53: 716-724.

822.

Fujii T, Namba Y, Fujitani S, et al. Low-dose continuous renal replacement therapy for
acute kidney injury. Int J Artif Organs 2012; 35: 525-530.

823.

Yasuda H, Uchino S, Uji M, et al. The lower limit of intensity to control uremia during
continuous renal replacement therapy. Crit Care 2014; 18: 539.

824.

Okamoto K, Fukushima H, Kawaguchi M, et al. Low-Dose Continuous Kidney
Replacement Therapy and Mortality in Critically Ill Patients With Acute Kidney Injury:
A Retrospective Cohort Study. Am J Kidney Dis 2024; 84: 145-153 e141.

825.

Doi K, Nishida O, Shigematsu T, et al. The Japanese Clinical Practice Guideline for
acute kidney injury 2016. J Intensive Care 2018; 6: 48.

826.

Fujii T: Low-intensity Versus Medium-intensity Continuous Kidney Replacement
Therapy for Critically Ill Patients (LIMIT). (2024) National Library of Medicine,
Washington, DC. Available at: https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06014801. Accessed
November 25, 2025

827.

Zarbock A: Standard Dose Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy (CRRT) Versus
Low-Dose CRRT ( KETZEREI ). (2024), National Library of Medicine, Washington,
DC. Available at: https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06021288. Accessed November 25,
2025.

R

AF
T

820.

Bagshaw SM, Wald R: LoW Dose-Intensity vs. Standard Dose-Intensity COntinuous
Renal ReplaceMent Therapy in Critically Ill Patients (WISDOM) (WISDOM). (2024),
National Library of Medicine, Washington, DC. Available at:
https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT06446739. Accessed November 25, 2025

D

828.

829.

Rewa OG, Ortiz-Soriano V, Lambert J, et al. Epidemiology and Outcomes of AKI
Treated With Continuous Kidney Replacement Therapy: The Multicenter CRRTnet
Study. Kidney Med 2023; 5: 100641.

830.

Vaara ST, Serpa Neto A, Bellomo R, et al. Regional Practice Variation and Outcomes in
the Standard Versus Accelerated Initiation of Renal Replacement Therapy in Acute
Kidney Injury (STARRT-AKI) Trial: A Post Hoc Secondary Analysis. Crit Care Explor
2024; 6: e1053.

831.

Mottes TA, Goldstein SL, Basu RK. Process based quality improvement using a
continuous renal replacement therapy dashboard. BMC Nephrol 2019; 20: 17.
447

Griffin BR, Thomson A, Yoder M, et al. Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy Dosing
in Critically Ill Patients: A Quality Improvement Initiative. Am J Kidney Dis 2019; 74:
727-735.

833.

Ruiz EF, Ortiz-Soriano VM, Talbott M, et al. Development, implementation and
outcomes of a quality assurance system for the provision of continuous renal replacement
therapy in the intensive care unit. Sci Rep 2020; 10: 20616.

834.

Bagshaw SM, Chakravarthi MR, Ricci Z, et al. Precision Continuous Renal Replacement
Therapy and Solute Control. Blood Purif 2016; 42: 238-247.

835.

Bouman CS, Oudemans-Van Straaten HM, Tijssen JG, et al. Effects of early highvolume continuous venovenous hemofiltration on survival and recovery of renal function
in intensive care patients with acute renal failure: a prospective, randomized trial. Crit
Care Med 2002; 30: 2205-2211.

836.

Ronco C, Bellomo R, Homel P, et al. Effects of different doses in continuous venovenous haemofiltration on outcomes of acute renal failure: a prospective randomised trial.
Lancet 2000; 356: 26-30.

837.

Saudan P, Niederberger M, De Seigneux S, et al. Adding a dialysis dose to continuous
hemofiltration increases survival in patients with acute renal failure. Kidney Int 2006; 70:
1312-1317.

838.

Faulhaber-Walter R, Hafer C, Jahr N, et al. The Hannover Dialysis Outcome study:
comparison of standard versus intensified extended dialysis for treatment of patients with
acute kidney injury in the intensive care unit. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2009; 24: 21792186.

R

AF
T

832.

Schiffl H, Lang SM, Fischer R. Daily hemodialysis and the outcome of acute renal
failure. N Engl J Med 2002; 346: 305-310.

D

839.

840.

Skofic N, Arnol M, Buturovic-Ponikvar J, et al. Intermittent high-volume predilution online haemofiltration versus standard intermittent haemodialysis in critically ill patients
with acute kidney injury: a prospective randomized study. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2012;
27: 4348-4356.

841.

Peters BJ, Barreto EF, Mara KC, et al. Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy and
Mortality in Critically Ill Obese Adults. Crit Care Explor 2023; 5: e0998.

842.

Devine BJ. Gentamicin therapy. Drug Intell Clin Pharm 1974; 8: 650–655.

843.

Kusirisin P LJ, Rewa OG; Neyra JA, Bagshaw SM. . Association between obesity and
kidney outcomes in critically ill patients with acute kidney injury receiving continuous
448

renal replacement therapy: A secondary analysis of the Multicentre CRRTnet Study.
Critical Care Medicine 2026; In press.
Borthwick EM, Hill CJ, Rabindranath KS, et al. High-volume haemofiltration for sepsis
in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2017; 1: CD008075.

845.

Clark E, Molnar AO, Joannes-Boyau O, et al. High-volume hemofiltration for septic
acute kidney injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care 2014; 18: R7.

846.

Boussekey N, Chiche A, Faure K, et al. A pilot randomized study comparing high and
low volume hemofiltration on vasopressor use in septic shock. Intensive Care Med 2008;
34: 1646-1653.

847.

Zhang P, Yang Y, Lv R, et al. Effect of the intensity of continuous renal replacement
therapy in patients with sepsis and acute kidney injury: a single-center randomized
clinical trial. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2012; 27: 967-973.

848.

Joannes-Boyau O, Honore PM, Perez P, et al. High-volume versus standard-volume
haemofiltration for septic shock patients with acute kidney injury (IVOIRE study): a
multicentre randomized controlled trial. Intensive Care Med 2013; 39: 1535-1546.

849.

Chung KK, Coates EC, Smith DJ, Jr., et al. High-volume hemofiltration in adult burn
patients with septic shock and acute kidney injury: a multicenter randomized controlled
trial. Crit Care 2017; 21: 289.

850.

Li P, Qu LP, Qi D, et al. High-dose versus low-dose haemofiltration for the treatment of
critically ill patients with acute kidney injury: an updated systematic review and metaanalysis. BMJ Open 2017; 7: e014171.

R

AF
T

844.

O'Brien Z, Cass A, Cole L, et al. Higher versus Lower Continuous Renal Replacement
Therapy Intensity in Critically ill Patients with Liver Dysfunction. Blood Purif 2018; 45:
36-43.

D

851.

852.

Park JT, Lee H, Kee YK, et al. High-Dose Versus Conventional-Dose Continuous
Venovenous Hemodiafiltration and Patient and Kidney Survival and Cytokine Removal
in Sepsis-Associated Acute Kidney Injury: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Am J Kidney
Dis 2016; 68: 599-608.

853.

Cole L, Bellomo R, Journois D, et al. High-volume haemofiltration in human septic
shock. Intensive Care Med 2001; 27: 978-986.

854.

Ghani RA, Zainudin S, Ctkong N, et al. Serum IL-6 and IL-1-ra with sequential organ
failure assessment scores in septic patients receiving high-volume haemofiltration and
continuous venovenous haemofiltration. Nephrology (Carlton) 2006; 11: 386-393.

449

Vasquez Jimenez E, Anumudu SJ, Neyra JA. Dose of Continuous Renal Replacement
Therapy in Critically Ill Patients: A Bona Fide Quality Indicator. Nephron 2021; 145: 9198.

856.

Evanson JA, Himmelfarb J, Wingard R, et al. Prescribed versus delivered dialysis in
acute renal failure patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1998; 32: 731-738.

857.

Venkataraman R, Kellum JA, Palevsky P. Dosing patterns for continuous renal
replacement therapy at a large academic medical center in the United States. J Crit Care
2002; 17: 246-250.

858.

Monti G, Herrera M, Kindgen-Milles D, et al. The DOse REsponse Multicentre
International Collaborative Initiative (DO-RE-MI). Contrib Nephrol 2007; 156: 434-443.

859.

Vesconi S, Cruz DN, Fumagalli R, et al. Delivered dose of renal replacement therapy and
mortality in critically ill patients with acute kidney injury. Crit Care 2009; 13: R57.

860.

Claure-Del Granado R, Macedo E, Chertow GM, et al. Effluent volume in continuous
renal replacement therapy overestimates the delivered dose of dialysis. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2011; 6: 467-475.

861.

Zhang Z, Ni H, Fan H, et al. Actually delivered dose of continuous renal replacement
therapy is underestimated in hemofiltration. ASAIO J 2013; 59: 622-626.

862.

Gotch FA, Sargent JA. A mechanistic analysis of the National Cooperative Dialysis
Study (NCDS). Kidney Int 1985; 28: 526-534.

R

AF
T

855.

Held PJ, Port FK, Wolfe RA, et al. The dose of hemodialysis and patient mortality.
Kidney Int 1996; 50: 550-556.

864.

Kanagasundaram NS, Greene T, Larive AB, et al. Prescribing an equilibrated intermittent
hemodialysis dose in intensive care unit acute renal failure. Kidney Int 2003; 64: 22982310.

D

863.

865.

Al Saran K, Sabry A, Abdulghafour M, et al. Online conductivity monitoring of dialysis
adequacy versus Kt/V derived from urea reduction ratio: a prospective study from a
Saudi Center. Ren Fail 2010; 32: 36-40.

866.

Fazl EM, Ahmad S, Elahi I, et al. Comparison between different methods of calculating
Kt/V as the marker of adequacy of dialysis. Pak J Med Sci 2022; 38: 167-171.

867.

Kilonzo KG, Ghosh S, Temu SA, et al. Outcome of acute peritoneal dialysis in northern
Tanzania. Perit Dial Int 2012; 32: 261-266.

450

Chitalia VC, Almeida AF, Rai H, et al. Is peritoneal dialysis adequate for hypercatabolic
acute renal failure in developing countries? Kidney Int 2002; 61: 747-757.

869.

Ponce D, Brito GA, Abrao JG, et al. Different prescribed doses of high-volume
peritoneal dialysis and outcome of patients with acute kidney injury. Adv Perit Dial 2011;
27: 118-124.

870.

Parapiboon W, Jamratpan T. Intensive Versus Minimal Standard Dosage for Peritoneal
Dialysis in Acute Kidney Injury: A Randomized Pilot Study. Perit Dial Int 2017; 37:
523-528.

871.

Abdou N, Antwi S, Koffi LA, et al. Peritoneal Dialysis to Treat Patients with Acute
Kidney Injury-The Saving Young Lives Experience in West Africa: Proceedings of the
Saving Young Lives Session at the First International Conference of Dialysis in West
Africa, Dakar, Senegal, December 2015. Perit Dial Int 2017; 37: 155-158.

872.

Finkelstein FO, Smoyer WE, Carter M, et al. Peritoneal dialysis, acute kidney injury, and
the Saving Young Lives program. Perit Dial Int 2014; 34: 478-480.

873.

McCulloch M, Luyckx VA, Cullis B, et al. Challenges of access to kidney care for
children in low-resource settings. Nat Rev Nephrol 2021; 17: 33-45.

874.

Parienti JJ, Megarbane B, Fischer MO, et al. Catheter dysfunction and dialysis
performance according to vascular access among 736 critically ill adults requiring renal
replacement therapy: a randomized controlled study. Crit Care Med 2010; 38: 11181125.

R

AF
T

868.

Lok CE, Huber TS, Lee T, et al. KDOQI Clinical Practice Guideline for Vascular
Access: 2019 Update. Am J Kidney Dis 2020; 75: S1-S164.

876.

Oliver MJ, Callery SM, Thorpe KE, et al. Risk of bacteremia from temporary
hemodialysis catheters by site of insertion and duration of use: a prospective study.
Kidney Int 2000; 58: 2543-2545.

D

875.

877.

Merrer J, De Jonghe B, Golliot F, et al. Complications of femoral and subclavian venous
catheterization in critically ill patients: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2001; 286:
700-707.

878.

Gnannt R, Chamlati R, Waespe N, et al. Clinical Impact of Chronic Venous Changes
Induced by Central Lines in Children: A Cohort with Abnormal Venograms. J Vasc
Interv Radiol 2019; 30: 715-723.

879.

Dabrowiecki A, Kokabi N, Hua H, et al. Hospital Charges Associated with Central
Venous Stenosis in Pediatric Patients Requiring Long-Term Central Venous Access. J
Pediatr 2020; 221: 145-150 e142.
451

Shin HS, Towbin AJ, Zhang B, et al. Venous thrombosis and stenosis after peripherally
inserted central catheter placement in children. Pediatr Radiol 2017; 47: 1670-1675.

881.

Parienti JJ, Thirion M, Megarbane B, et al. Femoral vs jugular venous catheterization and
risk of nosocomial events in adults requiring acute renal replacement therapy: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2008; 299: 2413-2422.

882.

Peres PW. Positioning central venous catheters--a prospective survey. Anaesth Intensive
Care 1990; 18: 536-539.

883.

Czepizak CA, O'Callaghan JM, Venus B. Evaluation of formulas for optimal positioning
of central venous catheters. Chest 1995; 107: 1662-1664.

884.

Paterson RS, Chopra V, Brown E, et al. Selection and Insertion of Vascular Access
Devices in Pediatrics: A Systematic Review. Pediatrics 2020; 145: S243-S268.

885.

Ullman AJ, Chopra V, Brown E, et al. Developing Appropriateness Criteria for Pediatric
Vascular Access. Pediatrics 2020; 145: S233-S242.

886.

Baskin KM, Jimenez RM, Cahill AM, et al. Cavoatrial junction and central venous
anatomy: implications for central venous access tip position. J Vasc Interv Radiol 2008;
19: 359-365.

887.

Franco-Sadud R, Schnobrich D, Mathews BK, et al. Recommendations on the Use of
Ultrasound Guidance for Central and Peripheral Vascular Access in Adults: A Position
Statement of the Society of Hospital Medicine. J Hosp Med 2019; 14: E1-E22.

R

AF
T

880.

Lamperti M, Biasucci DG, Disma N, et al. European Society of Anaesthesiology
guidelines on peri-operative use of ultrasound-guided for vascular access (PERSEUS
vascular access). Eur J Anaesthesiol 2020; 37: 344-376.

D

888.

889.

Singh Y, Tissot C, Fraga MV, et al. International evidence-based guidelines on Point of
Care Ultrasound (POCUS) for critically ill neonates and children issued by the POCUS
Working Group of the European Society of Paediatric and Neonatal Intensive Care
(ESPNIC). Crit Care 2020; 24: 65.

890.

Shroff R, Calder F, Bakkaloglu S, et al. Vascular access in children requiring
maintenance haemodialysis: a consensus document by the European Society for
Paediatric Nephrology Dialysis Working Group. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2019; 34:
1746-1765.

891.

Daverio M, Cortina G, Jones A, et al. Continuous Kidney Replacement Therapy Practices
in Pediatric Intensive Care Units Across Europe. JAMA Netw Open 2022; 5: e2246901.

452

Blake M, Augustin A. Practice Recommendations: Intravascular Dialysis Care to Prevent
Central Line-Associated Blood Stream Infections in Adults. (https://ipaccanada.org/photos/custom/OldSite/pdf/DIG_Dialysis_Catheter_Care_Practice_Recomen
dations-2016.pdf).

893.

Craswell A, Massey D, Sriram D, et al. A Process Evaluation of the National
Implementation of a Bundle for Central Venous Catheter Care for Hemodialysis.
Kidney360 2023; 4: e496-e504.

894.

Schwab SJ, Beathard G. The hemodialysis catheter conundrum: hate living with them,
but can't live without them. Kidney Int 1999; 56: 1-17.

895.

Mermel LA. Prevention of intravascular catheter-related infections. Ann Intern Med
2000; 132: 391-402.

896.

Pronovost P, Needham D, Berenholtz S, et al. An intervention to decrease catheterrelated bloodstream infections in the ICU. N Engl J Med 2006; 355: 2725-2732.

897.

Boucley I, Dargent A, Andreu P, et al. Systematic review of locking solutions for nontunneled hemodialysis catheters. Hemodial Int 2023; 27: 12-20.

898.

Hermite L, Quenot JP, Nadji A, et al. Sodium citrate versus saline catheter locks for nontunneled hemodialysis central venous catheters in critically ill adults: a randomized
controlled trial. Intensive Care Med 2012; 38: 279-285.

899.

Winnicki W, Herkner H, Lorenz M, et al. Taurolidine-based catheter lock regimen
significantly reduces overall costs, infection, and dysfunction rates of tunneled
hemodialysis catheters. Kidney Int 2018; 93: 753-760.

R

AF
T

892.

Nguyen T, Camins BC, Butler DA. Taurolidine and Heparin as Catheter Lock Solution
for Central Venous Catheters in Hemodialysis. Am J Ther 2024; 31: e398-e409.

D

900.

901.

Kazakova SV, Baggs J, Apata IW, et al. Vascular Access and Risk of Bloodstream
Infection Among Older Incident Hemodialysis Patients. Kidney Med 2020; 2: 276-285.

902.

Unnikrishnan S, Huynh TN, Brott BC, et al. Turbulent flow evaluation of the venous
needle during hemodialysis. J Biomech Eng 2005; 127: 1141-1146.

903.

Weijmer MC, Vervloet MG, ter Wee PM. Compared to tunnelled cuffed haemodialysis
catheters, temporary untunnelled catheters are associated with more complications
already within 2 weeks of use. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2004; 19: 670-677.

904.

Bellomo R, Ronco C. Continuous renal replacement therapy in the intensive care unit.
Intensive Care Med 1999; 25: 781-789.

453

Saad TF. Bacteremia associated with tunneled, cuffed hemodialysis catheters. Am J
Kidney Dis 1999; 34: 1114-1124.

906.

Langer JM, Cohen RM, Berns JS, et al. Staphylococcus-infected tunneled dialysis
catheters: is over-the-wire exchange an appropriate management option? Cardiovasc
Intervent Radiol 2011; 34: 1230-1235.

907.

Miller LM, MacRae JM, Kiaii M, et al. Hemodialysis Tunneled Catheter Noninfectious
Complications. Can J Kidney Health Dis 2016; 3: 2054358116669130.

908.

Chua HR, Schneider AG, Sherry NL, et al. Initial and extended use of femoral versus
nonfemoral double-lumen vascular catheters and catheter-related infection during
continuous renal replacement therapy. Am J Kidney Dis 2014; 64: 909-917.

909.

O'Grady NP, Alexander M, Burns LA, et al. Guidelines for the prevention of
intravascular catheter-related infections. Clin Infect Dis 2011; 52: e162-193.

910.

Cobb DK, High KP, Sawyer RG, et al. A controlled trial of scheduled replacement of
central venous and pulmonary-artery catheters. N Engl J Med 1992; 327: 1062-1068.

911.

Murea M, James KM, Russell GB, et al. Risk of catheter-related bloodstream infection in
elderly patients on hemodialysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2014; 9: 764-770.

912.

McGee DC, Gould MK. Preventing complications of central venous catheterization. N
Engl J Med 2003; 348: 1123-1133.

913.

Chand DH, Valentini RP, Kamil ES. Hemodialysis vascular access options in pediatrics:
considerations for patients and practitioners. Pediatr Nephrol 2009; 24: 1121-1128.

914.

Saran R, Robinson B, Abbott KC, et al. US Renal Data System 2019 Annual Data
Report: Epidemiology of Kidney Disease in the United States. Am J Kidney Dis 2020;
75: A6-A7.

D

R

AF
T

905.

915.

Zhou Z, Liu C, Yang Y, et al. Anticoagulation options for continuous renal replacement
therapy in critically ill patients: a systematic review and network meta-analysis of
randomized controlled trials. Crit Care 2023; 27: 222.

916.

Tsujimoto H, Tsujimoto Y, Nakata Y, et al. Pharmacological interventions for preventing
clotting of extracorporeal circuits during continuous renal replacement therapy. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2020; 3: CD012467.

917.

Buccione E, Bambi S, Rasero L, et al. Regional Citrate Anticoagulation and Systemic
Anticoagulation during Pediatric Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy: A Systematic
Literature Review. J Clin Med 2022; 11: 3121.

454

Deep A, Alexander EC, Khatri A, et al. Epoprostenol (Prostacyclin Analog) as a Sole
Anticoagulant in Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy for Critically Ill Children With
Liver Disease: Single-Center Retrospective Study, 2010-2019. Pediatr Crit Care Med
2024; 25: 15-23.

919.

Fiaccadori E, Maggiore U, Rotelli C, et al. Continuous haemofiltration in acute renal
failure with prostacyclin as the sole anti-haemostatic agent. Intensive Care Med 2002; 28:
586-593.

920.

Gainza FJ, Quintanilla N, Pijoan JI, et al. Role of prostacyclin (epoprostenol) as
anticoagulant in continuous renal replacement therapies: efficacy, security and cost
analysis. J Nephrol 2006; 19: 648-655.

921.

Sondhi E, Stewart M, Harper J, et al. A Comparison of the Anticoagulation Efficacy and
Safety of Epoprostenol to Heparin and Citrate in Children Receiving Continuous Renal
Replacement Therapy. Blood Purif 2024; 53: 838-846.

922.

Zhang W, Bai M, Yu Y, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy without
anticoagulation in critically ill patients at high risk of bleeding: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Semin Dial 2021; 34: 196-208.

923.

Atis SK, Duyu M, Karakaya Z, et al. Citrate anticoagulation and systemic heparin
anticoagulation during continuous renal replacement therapy among critically-ill
children. Pediatr Res 2024; 96: 702-712.

924.

Raina R, Agrawal N, Kusumi K, et al. A Meta-Analysis of Extracorporeal Anticoagulants
in Pediatric Continuous Kidney Replacement Therapy. J Intensive Care Med 2022; 37:
577-594.

R

AF
T

918.

Rico MP, Fernandez Sarmiento J, Rojas Velasquez AM, et al. Regional citrate
anticoagulation for continuous renal replacement therapy in children. Pediatr Nephrol
2017; 32: 703-711.

D

925.

926.

Oudemans-van Straaten HM, Kellum JA, Bellomo R. Clinical review: anticoagulation for
continuous renal replacement therapy--heparin or citrate? Crit Care 2011; 15: 202.

927.

Bai M, Zhou M, He L, et al. Citrate versus heparin anticoagulation for continuous renal
replacement therapy: an updated meta-analysis of RCTs. Intensive Care Med 2015; 41:
2098-2110.

928.

Gattas DJ, Rajbhandari D, Bradford C, et al. A Randomized Controlled Trial of Regional
Citrate Versus Regional Heparin Anticoagulation for Continuous Renal Replacement
Therapy in Critically Ill Adults. Crit Care Med 2015; 43: 1622-1629.

929.

Zarbock A, Kullmar M, Kindgen-Milles D, et al. Effect of Regional Citrate
Anticoagulation vs Systemic Heparin Anticoagulation During Continuous Kidney
455

Replacement Therapy on Dialysis Filter Life Span and Mortality Among Critically Ill
Patients With Acute Kidney Injury: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA 2020; 324:
1629-1639.
Liu C, Mao Z, Kang H, et al. Regional citrate versus heparin anticoagulation for
continuous renal replacement therapy in critically ill patients: a meta-analysis with trial
sequential analysis of randomized controlled trials. Crit Care 2016; 20: 144.

931.

Srisawat N, Chakravarthi R. CRRT in developing world. Semin Dial 2021; 34: 567-575.

932.

Choi JY, Kang YJ, Jang HM, et al. Nafamostat Mesilate as an Anticoagulant During
Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy in Patients With High Bleeding Risk: A
Randomized Clinical Trial. Medicine (Baltimore) 2015; 94: e2392.

933.

Lee YK, Lee HW, Choi KH, et al. Ability of nafamostat mesilate to prolong filter
patency during continuous renal replacement therapy in patients at high risk of bleeding:
a randomized controlled study. PLoS One 2014; 9: e108737.

934.

Liu C, Yang Y, Ren J, et al. Nafamostat mesilate as anticoagulant for blood purification:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care 2025.

935.

Miyaji MJ, Ide K, Takashima K, et al. Comparison of nafamostat mesilate to citrate
anticoagulation in pediatric continuous kidney replacement therapy. Pediatr Nephrol
2022; 37: 2733-2742.

936.

Stanski NL, Gist KM, Hasson D, et al. Characteristics and Outcomes of Children and
Young Adults With Sepsis Requiring Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy: A
Comparative Analysis From the Worldwide Exploration of Renal Replacement Outcomes
Collaborative in Kidney Disease (WE-ROCK). Crit Care Med 2024; 52: 1686-1699.

R

AF
T

930.

Starr MC, Gist KM, Zang H, et al. Continuous Kidney Replacement Therapy and
Survival in Children and Young Adults: Findings From the Multinational WE-ROCK
Collaborative. Am J Kidney Dis 2024; 84: 406-415 e401.

D

937.

938.

Haga T, Ide K, Tani M. Characteristics of pediatric continuous renal replacement
therapies in hospitals with pediatric intensive care units in Japan. Ther Apher Dial 2023;
27: 562-570.

939.

Tovey L, Dickie H, Gangi S, et al. Beyond the randomized clinical trial: citrate for
continuous renal replacement therapy in clinical practice. Nephron Clin Pract 2013; 124:
119-123.

940.

Helms J, Tacquard C, Severac F, et al. High risk of thrombosis in patients with severe
SARS-CoV-2 infection: a multicenter prospective cohort study. Intensive Care Med
2020; 46: 1089-1098.
456

Valle EO, Cabrera CPS, Albuquerque CCC, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy
in COVID-19-associated AKI: adding heparin to citrate to extend filter life-a
retrospective cohort study. Crit Care 2021; 25: 299.

942.

Wang D, Yang M, Li S, et al. Efficacy and safety of low-molecular-weight-heparin plus
citrate in nephrotic syndrome during continuous kidney replacement therapy:
retrospective study. PeerJ 2025; 13: e18919.

943.

Zhu D, He J, Xiao Z, et al. Citrate and low-dose heparin combined anticoagulation in
pediatric continuous renal replacement therapy. Sci Rep 2024; 14: 13504.

944.

Mareedu N, German B, Gashti CN, et al. Low-Molecular-Weight Heparin Is a Superior
Anticoagulant to Unfractionated Heparin for Renal Replacement Therapy in Patients with
AKI due to Coronavirus Disease 2019 [ABSTRACT - PO0698]. J Am Soc Nephrol 2020;
31: 258.

945.

Brunelli SM, Cohen DE, Marlowe G, et al. Safety and efficacy of heparin during dialysis
in the context of systemic anticoagulant and antiplatelet medications. J Nephrol 2019; 32:
453-460.

946.

Chanas T, Hockman R, Rice T, et al. Clinical and Procedural Evaluation of a Pharmacy
Pharmacokinetic Consult Service. J Pharm Pract 2020; 33: 618-627.

947.

Treschan TA, Schaefer MS, Geib J, et al. Argatroban versus Lepirudin in critically ill
patients (ALicia): a randomized controlled trial. Crit Care 2014; 18: 588.

R

AF
T

941.

Colarossi G, Maffulli N, Trivellas A, et al. Superior outcomes with Argatroban for
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: a Bayesian network meta-analysis. Int J Clin Pharm
2021; 43: 825-838.

949.

Magnani HN. A review of 122 published outcomes of danaparoid anticoagulation for
intermittent haemodialysis. Thromb Res 2010; 125: e171-176.

950.

Abel EE, Kane-Gill SL, Seybert AL, et al. Direct thrombin inhibitors for management of
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia in patients receiving renal replacement therapy:
comparison of clinical outcomes. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2012; 69: 1559-1567.

951.

Cuker A, Arepally GM, Chong BH, et al. American Society of Hematology 2018
guidelines for management of venous thromboembolism: heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia. Blood Adv 2018; 2: 3360-3392.

952.

Davenport A. The changing face of dialyzer membranes and dialyzers. Semin Dial 2025;
38: 25-34.

D

948.

457

Schetz M, Van Cromphaut S, Dubois J, et al. Does the surface-treated AN69 membrane
prolong filter survival in CRRT without anticoagulation? Intensive Care Med 2012; 38:
1818-1825.

954.

Naorungroj T, Baldwin I, Eastwood G, et al. The effect of the AN69 ST100 versus
oXiris((R)) membrane on filter life during CRRT for non-anticoagulated liver failure
patients. Int J Artif Organs 2023; 46: 209-214.

955.

Su T, Jin Q, Liu Z. Polyethyleneimine-treated polyacrylonitrile membrane hemofilter for
critically ill patients receiving anticoagulant-free prolonged intermittent renal
replacement therapy: a single-center, prospective, self-controlled pilot study. BMC
Nephrol 2017; 18: 208.

956.

Torii Y, Yamada S, Yajima M, et al. Polymethylmethacrylate Membrane Dialyzer:
Historic but Modern. Blood Purif 2023; 52 Suppl 1: 8-14.

957.

Tsujimoto Y, Miki S, Shimada H, et al. Non-pharmacological interventions for
preventing clotting of extracorporeal circuits during continuous renal replacement
therapy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2021; 9: CD013330.

958.

Morgan D, Ho K, Murray C, et al. A randomized trial of catheters of different lengths to
achieve right atrium versus superior vena cava placement for continuous renal
replacement therapy. Am J Kidney Dis 2012; 60: 272-279.

959.

Ronco C, Ricci Z, De Backer D, et al. Renal replacement therapy in acute kidney injury:
controversy and consensus. Crit Care 2015; 19: 146.

R

AF
T

953.

Fealy N, Aitken L, Toit E, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy: current practice
in Australian and New Zealand intensive care units. Crit Care Resusc 2015; 17: 83-91.

961.

Uchino S, Bellomo R, Morimatsu H, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy: a
worldwide practice survey. The beginning and ending supportive therapy for the kidney
(B.E.S.T. kidney) investigators. Intensive Care Med 2007; 33: 1563-1570.

D

960.

962.

Fealy N, Aitken L, du Toit E, et al. Faster Blood Flow Rate Does Not Improve Circuit
Life in Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Crit
Care Med 2017; 45: e1018-e1025.

963.

Ramesh Prasad GV, Palevsky PM, Burr R, et al. Factors affecting system clotting in
continuous renal replacement therapy: results of a randomized, controlled trial. Clin
Nephrol 2000; 53: 55-60.

964.

Villa G, De Rosa S, Samoni S, et al. oXirisNet Registry: A Prospective, National
Registry on the oXiris Membrane. Blood Purif 2019; 47 Suppl 3: 1-8.

458

Wong ET, Ong V, Remani D, et al. Filter life and safety of heparin-grafted membrane for
continuous renal replacement therapy - A randomized controlled trial. Semin Dial 2021;
34: 300-308.

966.

Baldwin I, Tan HK, Bridge N, et al. Possible strategies to prolong circuit life during
hemofiltration: three controlled studies. Ren Fail 2002; 24: 839-848.

967.

Davies HT, Leslie G, Pereira SM, et al. A randomized comparative crossover study to
assess the affect on circuit life of varying pre-dilution volume associated with CVVH and
CVVHDF. Int J Artif Organs 2008; 31: 221-227.

968.

Friedrich JO, Wald R, Bagshaw SM, et al. Hemofiltration compared to hemodialysis for
acute kidney injury: systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care 2012; 16: R146.

969.

de Pont AC, Bouman CS, Bakhtiari K, et al. Predilution versus postdilution during
continuous venovenous hemofiltration: a comparison of circuit thrombogenesis. ASAIO J
2006; 52: 416-422.

970.

van der Voort PH, Gerritsen RT, Kuiper MA, et al. Filter run time in CVVH: pre- versus
post-dilution and nadroparin versus regional heparin-protamine anticoagulation. Blood
Purif 2005; 23: 175-180.

971.

Meier P, Meier R, Turini P, et al. Prolonged catheter survival in patients with acute
kidney injury on continuous renal replacement therapy using a less thrombogenic
micropatterned polymer modification. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2011; 26: 628-635.

972.

Dungen HD, von Heymann C, Ronco C, et al. Renal replacement therapy: physical
properties of hollow fibers influence efficiency. Int J Artif Organs 2001; 24: 357-366.

973.

Tsujimoto Y, Fujii T. How to Prolong Filter Life During Continuous Renal Replacement
Therapy? Crit Care 2022; 26: 62.

D

R

AF
T

965.

974.

Kyrk T, Bechara A, Skagerlind M, et al. Heparin and albumin as part of the priming
solution limits exposure to anticoagulation during hemodialysis: in vitro studies. Int J
Artif Organs 2014; 37: 734-740.

975.

Skagerlind M, Stegmayr B. Heparin albumin priming in a clinical setting for
hemodialysis patients at risk for bleeding. Hemodial Int 2017; 21: 180-189.

976.

Fransson F, Kyrk T, Skagerlind M, et al. Rinsing the extra corporeal circuit with a
heparin and albumin solution reduces the need for systemic anticoagulant in
hemodialysis. Int J Artif Organs 2013; 36: 725-729.

459

McLean AG, Davenport A, Cox D, et al. Effects of lactate-buffered and lactate-free
dialysate in CAVHD patients with and without liver dysfunction. Kidney Int 2000; 58:
1765-1772.

978.

Barenbrock M, Hausberg M, Matzkies F, et al. Effects of bicarbonate- and lactatebuffered replacement fluids on cardiovascular outcome in CVVH patients. Kidney Int
2000; 58: 1751-1757.

979.

Kierdorf HP, Leue C, Arns S. Lactate- or bicarbonate-buffered solutions in continuous
extracorporeal renal replacement therapies. Kidney Int Suppl 1999: S32-36.

980.

Zimmerman D, Cotman P, Ting R, et al. Continuous veno-venous haemodialysis with a
novel bicarbonate dialysis solution: prospective cross-over comparison with a lactate
buffered solution. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1999; 14: 2387-2391.

981.

Lumlertgul N, Tunstell P, Watts C, et al. In-House Production of Dialysis Solutions to
Overcome Challenges During the Coronavirus Disease 2019 Pandemic. Kidney Int Rep
2021; 6: 200-206.

982.

Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI). Complete
Dialysis Collection. AAMI. Available at: https://aami.org/newsresources/publications/complete-dialysis-collection-2022. Accessed November 25, 2025.

983.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Recommendations for Water Use in
Dialysis. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/dialysis-safety/hcp/recommendations-resources/water-use-indialysis.html. Accessed November 25, 2025.

R

AF
T

977.

Murugan R, Hoste E, Mehta RL, et al. Precision Fluid Management in Continuous Renal
Replacement Therapy. Blood Purif 2016; 42: 266-278.

985.

Yimsangyad K, Lertussavavivat T, Leewongworasingh A, et al. Implementation of
quality-controlled in-house dialysis solution for continuous renal replacement therapy: A
solution for resource-limited settings. J Crit Care 2025; 88: 155064.

986.

Thompson Bastin ML, Stromberg AJ, Nerusu SN, et al. Association of PhosphateContaining versus Phosphate-Free Solutions on Ventilator Days in Patients Requiring
Continuous Kidney Replacement Therapy. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2022; 17: 634-642.

987.

Kim MJ, Kim HR, Ham YR, et al. Comparison of Serum Phosphate Levels in Critically
Ill Patients with Acute Kidney Injury Undergoing Continuous Renal Replacement
Therapy Using Different Dialysates. Iran J Kidney Dis 2025; 19: 106-117.

988.

Mayerhofer T, Koglberger P, Perschinka F, et al. High bicarbonate replacement fluid and
time to pH normalization during continuous veno-venous hemofiltration with regional

D

984.

460

citrate anticoagulation: a retrospective single-center cohort study. Clin Kidney J 2025;
18: sfaf117.
Romanovsky A, Azevedo LC, Meeberg G, et al. Serum sodium shift in hyponatremic
patients undergoing liver transplantation: a retrospective cohort study. Ren Fail 2015; 37:
37-44.

990.

Neyra JA, Ortiz-Soriano VM, Ali D, et al. A Multidisciplinary Approach for the
Management of Severe Hyponatremia in Patients Requiring Continuous Renal
Replacement Therapy. Kidney Int Rep 2019; 4: 59-66.

991.

Tinawi M, Bastani B. A mathematical approach to severe hyponatremia and
hypernatremia in renal replacement therapies. Semin Dial 2021; 34: 42-50.

992.

Yessayan LT, Szamosfalvi B, Rosner MH. Management of dysnatremias with continuous
renal replacement therapy. Semin Dial 2021; 34: 472-479.

993.

Yee J, Mohiuddin N, Gradinariu T, et al. Sodium-Based Osmotherapy in Continuous
Renal Replacement Therapy: a Mathematical Approach. Kidney360 2020; 1: 281-291.

994.

Ting S, Chua HR, Cove ME. Euglycemic Ketosis During Continuous Kidney
Replacement Therapy With Glucose-Free Solution: A Report of 8 Cases. Am J Kidney
Dis 2021; 78: 305-308.

995.

Balakumar V, Murugan R, Sileanu FE, et al. Both Positive and Negative Fluid Balance
May Be Associated With Reduced Long-Term Survival in the Critically Ill. Crit Care
Med 2017; 45: e749-e757.

R

AF
T

989.

Andersson A, Norberg A, Broman LM, et al. Fluid balance after continuous renal
replacement therapy initiation and outcome in paediatric multiple organ failure. Acta
Anaesthesiol Scand 2019; 63: 1028-1036.

D

996.

997.

Burton JO, Jefferies HJ, Selby NM, et al. Hemodialysis-induced repetitive myocardial
injury results in global and segmental reduction in systolic cardiac function. Clin J Am
Soc Nephrol 2009; 4: 1925-1931.

998.

Burton JO, Jefferies HJ, Selby NM, et al. Hemodialysis-induced cardiac injury:
determinants and associated outcomes. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2009; 4: 914-920.

999.

Canaud B, Kooman JP, Selby NM, et al. Dialysis-Induced Cardiovascular and
Multiorgan Morbidity. Kidney Int Rep 2020; 5: 1856-1869.

1000.

Murugan R, Kerti SJ, Chang CH, et al. Association of Net Ultrafiltration Rate With
Mortality Among Critically Ill Adults With Acute Kidney Injury Receiving Continuous
Venovenous Hemodiafiltration: A Secondary Analysis of the Randomized Evaluation of
461

Normal vs Augmented Level (RENAL) of Renal Replacement Therapy Trial. JAMA
Netw Open 2019; 2: e195418.
Murugan R, Kerti SJ, Chang CH, et al. Association between Net Ultrafiltration Rate and
Renal Recovery among Critically Ill Adults with Acute Kidney Injury Receiving
Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy: An Observational Cohort Study. Blood Purif
2022; 51: 397-409.

1002.

Naorungroj T, Neto AS, Zwakman-Hessels L, et al. Early net ultrafiltration rate and
mortality in critically ill patients receiving continuous renal replacement therapy. Nephrol
Dial Transplant 2021; 36: 1112-1119.

1003.

Serpa Neto A, Naorungroj T, Murugan R, et al. Heterogeneity of Effect of Net
Ultrafiltration Rate among Critically Ill Adults Receiving Continuous Renal Replacement
Therapy. Blood Purif 2021; 50: 336-346.

1004.

Murugan R, Balakumar V, Kerti SJ, et al. Net ultrafiltration intensity and mortality in
critically ill patients with fluid overload. Crit Care 2018; 22: 223.

1005.

Tehranian S, Shawwa K, Kashani KB. Net ultrafiltration rate and its impact on mortality
in patients with acute kidney injury receiving continuous renal replacement therapy. Clin
Kidney J 2021; 14: 564-569.

1006.

White KC, Laupland KB, Ostermann M, et al. Current Fluid Management Practice in
Critically Ill Adults on Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy: A Binational,
Observational Study. Blood Purif 2024; 53: 624-633.

R

AF
T

1001.

Naorungroj T, Neto AS, Zwakman-Hessels L, et al. Early net ultrafiltration rate and
mortality in critically ill patients receiving continuous renal replacement therapy. Nephrol
Dial Transplant 2020.

1008.

Thadani S, Jujjavarapu HV, Silos C, et al. Net Fluid Balance Impacts Pediatric
Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy Liberation. Crit Care Med 2025; 53: e1033e1044.

1009.

Selewski DT, Barhight MF, Bjornstad EC, et al. Fluid assessment, fluid balance, and
fluid overload in sick children: a report from the Pediatric Acute Disease Quality
Initiative (ADQI) conference. Pediatr Nephrol 2024; 39: 955-979.

1010.

Pirkle JL, Jr., Comeau ME, Langefeld CD, et al. Effects of weight-based ultrafiltration
rate limits on intradialytic hypotension in hemodialysis. Hemodial Int 2018; 22: 270-278.

1011.

Murugan R, Ostermann M, Peng Z, et al. Net Ultrafiltration Prescription and Practice
Among Critically Ill Patients Receiving Renal Replacement Therapy: A Multinational
Survey of Critical Care Practitioners. Crit Care Med 2020; 48: e87-e97.

D

1007.

462

Rewa OG, Tolwani A, Mottes T, et al. Quality of care and safety measures of acute renal
replacement therapy: Workgroup statements from the 22nd acute disease quality initiative
(ADQI) consensus conference. J Crit Care 2019; 54: 52-57.

1013.

Rewa OG, Villeneuve PM, Lachance P, et al. Quality indicators of continuous renal
replacement therapy (CRRT) care in critically ill patients: a systematic review. Intensive
Care Med 2017; 43: 750-763.

1014.

Murphy HJ, Gien J, Sahay R, et al. Acute Kidney Injury, Fluid Overload, and Renal
Replacement Therapy Differ by Underlying Diagnosis in Neonatal Extracorporeal
Support and Impact Mortality Disparately. Blood Purif 2021; 50: 808-817.

1015.

Naorungroj T, Neto AS, Zwakman-Hessels L, et al. Mediators of the Impact of Hourly
Net Ultrafiltration Rate on Mortality in Critically Ill Patients Receiving Continuous Renal
Replacement Therapy. Crit Care Med 2020; 48: e934-e942.

1016.

Murugan R, Bellomo R, Palevsky PM, et al. Ultrafiltration in critically ill patients treated
with kidney replacement therapy. Nat Rev Nephrol 2021; 17: 262-276.

1017.

Robinson CH, Jeyakumar N, Luo B, et al. Long-Term Kidney Outcomes Following
Dialysis-Treated Childhood Acute Kidney Injury: A Population-Based Cohort Study. J
Am Soc Nephrol 2021; 32: 2005-2019.

1018.

Liu KD, Hsu C. Liberation From Acute Dialysis (LIBERATE-D). National Library of
Medicine. (https://clinicaltrials.gov/study/NCT04218370). Accesed January 13, 2026.

R

AF
T

1012.

Frohlich S, Donnelly A, Solymos O, et al. Use of 2-hour creatinine clearance to guide
cessation of continuous renal replacement therapy. J Crit Care 2012; 27: 744 e741-745.

1020.

Uchino S, Bellomo R, Morimatsu H, et al. Discontinuation of continuous renal
replacement therapy: a post hoc analysis of a prospective multicenter observational study.
Crit Care Med 2009; 37: 2576-2582.

D

1019.

1021.

Viallet N, Brunot V, Kuster N, et al. Daily urinary creatinine predicts the weaning of
renal replacement therapy in ICU acute kidney injury patients. Ann Intensive Care 2016;
6: 71.

1022.

Raurich JM, Llompart-Pou JA, Novo MA, et al. Successful weaning from continuous
renal replacement therapy. Associated risk factors. J Crit Care 2018; 45: 144-148.

1023.

Katayama S, Uchino S, Uji M, et al. Factors predicting successful discontinuation of
continuous renal replacement therapy. Anaesth Intensive Care 2016; 44: 453-457.

463

Katulka RJ, Al Saadon A, Sebastianski M, et al. Determining the optimal time for
liberation from renal replacement therapy in critically ill patients: a systematic review
and meta-analysis (DOnE RRT). Crit Care 2020; 24: 50.

1025.

Heise D, Gries D, Moerer O, et al. Predicting restoration of kidney function during
CRRT-free intervals. J Cardiothorac Surg 2012; 7: 6.

1026.

Stads S, Kant KM, de Jong MFC, et al. Predictors of short-term successful
discontinuation of continuous renal replacement therapy: results from a prospective
multicentre study. BMC Nephrol 2019; 20: 129.

1027.

Schiffl H, Lang SM. Current Approach to Successful Liberation from Renal Replacement
Therapy in Critically Ill Patients with Severe Acute Kidney Injury: The Quest for
Biomarkers Continues. Mol Diagn Ther 2021; 25: 1-8.

1028.

Baeg SI, Jeon J, Yoo H, et al. A Scoring Model with Simple Clinical Parameters to
Predict Successful Discontinuation of Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy. Blood
Purif 2021; 50: 779-789.

1029.

Liu C, Peng Z, Dong Y, et al. Predicting successful continuous renal replacement therapy
liberation in critically ill patients with acute kidney injury. J Crit Care 2021; 66: 6-13.

1030.

Valle EO, Smolentzov I, Gorzoni JLM, et al. A clinical model to predict successful renal
replacement therapy (RRT) discontinuation in patients with Acute Kidney Injury (AKI).
Clinics (Sao Paulo) 2023; 78: 100280.

1031.

Yoshida T, Matsuura R, Komaru Y, et al. Kinetic estimated glomerular filtration rate as a
predictor of successful continuous renal replacement therapy discontinuation. Nephrology
(Carlton) 2019; 24: 287-293.

1032.

Aniort J, Ait Hssain A, Pereira B, et al. Daily urinary urea excretion to guide intermittent
hemodialysis weaning in critically ill patients. Crit Care 2016; 20: 43.

D

R

AF
T

1024.

1033.

Jeon J, Kim DH, Baeg SI, et al. Association between diuretics and successful
discontinuation of continuous renal replacement therapy in critically ill patients with
acute kidney injury. Crit Care 2018; 22: 255.

1034.

Wu VC, Ko WJ, Chang HW, et al. Risk factors of early redialysis after weaning from
postoperative acute renal replacement therapy. Intensive Care Med 2008; 34: 101-108.

1035.

Sheng S, Li A, Liu X, et al. Factors and machine learning models for predicting
successful discontinuation of continuous renal replacement therapy in critically ill
patients with acute kidney injury: a retrospective cohort study based on MIMIC-IV
database. BMC Nephrol 2024; 25: 407.

464

Bagshaw SM, Delaney A, Jones D, et al. Diuretics in the management of acute kidney
injury: a multinational survey. Contrib Nephrol 2007; 156: 236-249.

1037.

Teixeira C, Garzotto F, Piccinni P, et al. Fluid balance and urine volume are independent
predictors of mortality in acute kidney injury. Crit Care 2013; 17: R14.

1038.

Guzzo I, de Galasso L, Bayazit AK, et al. Acute paediatric kidney replacement therapies
in Europe: demographic results from the EurAKId Registry. Nephrol Dial Transplant
2022; 37: 770-780.

1039.

Bagshaw SM, Gibney RTN, Kruger P, et al. The effect of low-dose furosemide in
critically ill patients with early acute kidney injury: A pilot randomized blinded
controlled trial (the SPARK study). J Crit Care 2017; 42: 138-146.

1040.

Bove T, Belletti A, Putzu A, et al. Intermittent furosemide administration in patients with
or at risk for acute kidney injury: Meta-analysis of randomized trials. PLoS One 2018;
13: e0196088.

1041.

van der Voort PH, Boerma EC, Koopmans M, et al. Furosemide does not improve renal
recovery after hemofiltration for acute renal failure in critically ill patients: a double blind
randomized controlled trial. Crit Care Med 2009; 37: 533-538.

1042.

Rewa OG, Eurich DT, Noel Gibney RT, et al. A modified Delphi process to identify,
rank and prioritize quality indicators for continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT)
care in critically ill patients. J Crit Care 2018; 47: 145-152.

1043.

Galindo P, Neyra JA. Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy: What Have We Learned
And What Are Key Milestones For The Years To Come? Rev Invest Clin 2023; 75: 348358.

1044.

Cordoza M, Rachinski K, Nathan K, et al. A Quality Improvement Initiative to Reduce
the Frequency of Delays in Initiation and Restarts of Continuous Renal Replacement
Therapy. J Nurs Care Qual 2021; 36: 308-314.

D

R

AF
T

1036.

1045.

Liu KD, Goldstein SL, Vijayan A, et al. AKI!Now Initiative: Recommendations for
Awareness, Recognition, and Management of AKI. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2020; 15:
1838-1847.

1046.

Kee YK, Kim EJ, Park KS, et al. The effect of specialized continuous renal replacement
therapy team in acute kidney injury patients treatment. Yonsei Med J 2015; 56: 658-665.

1047.

Kashani KB, Awdishu L, Bagshaw SM, et al. Digital health and acute kidney injury:
consensus report of the 27th Acute Disease Quality Initiative workgroup. Nat Rev
Nephrol 2023; 19: 807-818.

465

Brodie D, Bacchetta M. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for ARDS in adults. N
Engl J Med 2011; 365: 1905-1914.

1049.

Mullany D, Shekar K, Platts D, et al. The rapidly evolving use of extracorporeal life
support (ECLS) in adults. Heart Lung Circ 2014; 23: 1091-1092.

1050.

Shekar K, Mullany DV, Thomson B, et al. Extracorporeal life support devices and
strategies for management of acute cardiorespiratory failure in adult patients: a
comprehensive review. Crit Care 2014; 18: 219.

1051.

MacLaren G, Combes A, Bartlett RH. Contemporary extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation for adult respiratory failure: life support in the new era. Intensive Care Med
2012; 38: 210-220.

1052.

Thongprayoon C, Cheungpasitporn W, Lertjitbanjong P, et al. Incidence and Impact of
Acute Kidney Injury in Patients Receiving Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation: A
Meta-Analysis. J Clin Med 2019; 8: 981.

1053.

Hansrivijit P, Lertjitbanjong P, Thongprayoon C, et al. Acute Kidney Injury in Pediatric
Patients on Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation: A Systematic Review and Metaanalysis. Medicines (Basel) 2019; 6: 109.

1054.

Fleming GM, Sahay R, Zappitelli M, et al. The Incidence of Acute Kidney Injury and Its
Effect on Neonatal and Pediatric Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation Outcomes: A
Multicenter Report From the Kidney Intervention During Extracorporeal Membrane
Oxygenation Study Group. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2016; 17: 1157-1169.

R

AF
T

1048.

Chen H, Yu RG, Yin NN, et al. Combination of extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
and continuous renal replacement therapy in critically ill patients: a systematic review.
Crit Care 2014; 18: 675.

1056.

Han SS, Kim HJ, Lee SJ, et al. Effects of Renal Replacement Therapy in Patients
Receiving Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation: A Meta-Analysis. Ann Thorac Surg
2015; 100: 1485-1495.

1057.

Fleming GM, Askenazi DJ, Bridges BC, et al. A multicenter international survey of renal
supportive therapy during ECMO: the Kidney Intervention During Extracorporeal
Membrane Oxygenation (KIDMO) group. ASAIO J 2012; 58: 407-414.

1058.

Antonucci E, Lamanna I, Fagnoul D, et al. The Impact of Renal Failure and Renal
Replacement Therapy on Outcome During Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation
Therapy. Artif Organs 2016; 40: 746-754.

1059.

Bridges BC, Dhar A, Ramanathan K, et al. Extracorporeal Life Support Organization
Guidelines for Fluid Overload, Acute Kidney Injury, and Electrolyte Management.
ASAIO J 2022; 68: 611-618.

D

1055.

466

Gorga SM, Lima L, Askenazi DJ, et al. Fluid Balance Management Informs Renal
Replacement Therapy Use During Pediatric Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation: A
Survey Report From the Kidney Intervention During Extracorporeal Membrane
Oxygenation Group. ASAIO J 2022; 68: 407-412.

1061.

Askenazi DJ, Selewski DT, Paden ML, et al. Renal replacement therapy in critically ill
patients receiving extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2012;
7: 1328-1336.

1062.

Ostermann M, Connor M, Jr., Kashani K. Continuous renal replacement therapy during
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation: why, when and how? Curr Opin Crit Care 2018;
24: 493-503.

1063.

Seczynska B, Krolikowski W, Nowak I, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy
during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation in patients treated in medical intensive care
unit: technical considerations. Ther Apher Dial 2014; 18: 523-534.

1064.

Symons JM, McMahon MW, Karamlou T, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy
with an automated monitor is superior to a free-flow system during extracorporeal life
support. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2013; 14: e404-408.

1065.

de Tymowski C, Augustin P, Houissa H, et al. CRRT Connected to ECMO: Managing
High Pressures. ASAIO J 2017; 63: 48-52.

1066.

Sidebotham D, Allen SJ, McGeorge A, et al. Venovenous extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation in adults: practical aspects of circuits, cannulae, and procedures. J
Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2012; 26: 893-909.

R

AF
T

1060.

Simons AP, Weerwind PW. Re: How to perform a haemodialysis using the arterial and
venous lines of an extracorporeal life support. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2011; 39: 10841085.

D

1067.

1068.

Ostermann M, Lumlertgul N. Acute kidney injury in ECMO patients. Crit Care 2021; 25:
313.

1069.

Hoover NG, Heard M, Reid C, et al. Enhanced fluid management with continuous
venovenous hemofiltration in pediatric respiratory failure patients receiving
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support. Intensive Care Med 2008; 34: 22412247.

1070.

Gist KM, Misfeldt A, Sahay RD, et al. Acute Kidney Injury and Fluid Overload in
Pediatric Extracorporeal Cardio-Pulmonary Resuscitation: A Multicenter Retrospective
Cohort Study. ASAIO J 2022; 68: 956-963.

467

Gorga SM, Sahay RD, Askenazi DJ, et al. Fluid overload and fluid removal in pediatric
patients on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation requiring continuous renal replacement
therapy: a multicenter retrospective cohort study. Pediatr Nephrol 2020; 35: 871-882.

1072.

Mallory PP, Selewski DT, Askenazi DJ, et al. Acute Kidney Injury, Fluid Overload, and
Outcomes in Children Supported With Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation for a
Respiratory Indication. ASAIO J 2020; 66: 319-326.

1073.

Selewski DT, Askenazi DJ, Bridges BC, et al. The Impact of Fluid Overload on
Outcomes in Children Treated With Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation: A
Multicenter Retrospective Cohort Study. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2017; 18: 1126-1135.

1074.

Murphy HJ, Eklund MJ, Hill J, et al. Early continuous renal replacement therapy during
infant extracorporeal life support is associated with decreased lung opacification. J Artif
Organs 2019; 22: 286-293.

1075.

Selewski DT, Cornell TT, Blatt NB, et al. Fluid overload and fluid removal in pediatric
patients on extracorporeal membrane oxygenation requiring continuous renal replacement
therapy. Crit Care Med 2012; 40: 2694-2699.

1076.

Selewski DT, Gist KM, Basu RK, et al. Impact of the Magnitude and Timing of Fluid
Overload on Outcomes in Critically Ill Children: A Report From the Multicenter
International Assessment of Worldwide Acute Kidney Injury, Renal Angina, and
Epidemiology (AWARE) Study. Crit Care Med 2023; 51: 606-618.

1077.

McCanny P, Smith MW, O'Brien SG, et al. Fluid Balance and Recovery of Native Lung
Function in Adult Patients Supported by Venovenous Extracorporeal Membrane
Oxygenation and Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy. ASAIO J 2019; 65: 614-619.

R

AF
T

1071.

Kaddourah A, Basu RK, Bagshaw SM, et al. Epidemiology of Acute Kidney Injury in
Critically Ill Children and Young Adults. N Engl J Med 2017; 376: 11-20.

D

1078.

1079.

Alobaidi R, Morgan C, Goldstein SL, et al. Population-Based Epidemiology and
Outcomes of Acute Kidney Injury in Critically Ill Children. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2020;
21: 82-91.

1080.

Jetton JG, Boohaker LJ, Sethi SK, et al. Incidence and outcomes of neonatal acute kidney
injury (AWAKEN): a multicentre, multinational, observational cohort study. Lancet
Child Adolesc Health 2017; 1: 184-194.

1081.

Hessey E, Perreault S, Dorais M, et al. Acute Kidney Injury in Critically Ill Children and
Subsequent Chronic Kidney Disease. Can J Kidney Health Dis 2019; 6:
2054358119880188.

468

Greenberg JH, Coca S, Parikh CR. Long-term risk of chronic kidney disease and
mortality in children after acute kidney injury: a systematic review. BMC Nephrol 2014;
15: 184.

1083.

Hickson MR, Conroy AL, Bangirana P, et al. Acute kidney injury in Ugandan children
with severe malaria is associated with long-term behavioral problems. PLoS One 2019;
14: e0226405.

1084.

Myers SR, Glaser NS, Trainor JL, et al. Frequency and Risk Factors of Acute Kidney
Injury During Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Children and Association With Neurocognitive
Outcomes. JAMA Netw Open 2020; 3: e2025481.

1085.

Pande CK, Akcan-Arikan A, Monteiro S, et al. Recurrent acute kidney injury is
associated with delayed language development in infants with Congenital Heart Disease.
Cardiol Young 2024: 1-5.

1086.

Pande CK, Noll L, Afonso N, et al. Neurodevelopmental Outcomes in Infants With
Cardiac Surgery Associated Acute Kidney Injury. Ann Thorac Surg 2022; 114: 23472354.

1087.

Chen CC, Chu CH, Lin YC, et al. Neurodevelopment After Neonatal Acute Kidney
Injury in Very Preterm-Birth Children. Kidney Int Rep 2023; 8: 1784-1791.

1088.

Fuhrman DY, Stenson EK, Alhamoud I, et al. Major Adverse Kidney Events in Pediatric
Continuous Kidney Replacement Therapy. JAMA Netw Open 2024; 7: e240243.

1089.

Gist KM, Fuhrman DY, Deep A, et al. Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy: Current
State and Future Directions for Worldwide Practice. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2024; 25:
554-560.

1090.

McCulloch MI, Nourse P, Argent AC. Use of locally prepared peritoneal dialysis (PD)
fluid for acute PD in children and infants in Africa. Perit Dial Int 2020; 40: 441-445.

D

R

AF
T

1082.

1091.

Fuhrman DY, Gist KM, Akcan-Arikan A. Current practices in pediatric continuous
kidney replacement therapy: a systematic review-guided multinational modified Delphi
consensus study. Pediatr Nephrol 2023; 38: 2817-2826.

1092.

Raina R, Suchan A, Sethi SK, et al. Nutrition in Critically Ill Children with AKI on
Continuous RRT: Consensus Recommendations. Kidney360 2024; 5: 285-309.

1093.

Vega MRW, Cerminara D, Desloovere A, et al. Nutritional management of children with
acute kidney injury-clinical practice recommendations from the Pediatric Renal Nutrition
Taskforce. Pediatr Nephrol 2023; 38: 3559-3580.

469

Alobaidi R, Basu RK, DeCaen A, et al. Fluid Accumulation in Critically Ill Children.
Crit Care Med 2020; 48: 1034-1041.

1095.

Lima L, Menon S, Goldstein SL, et al. Timing of Fluid Overload and Association With
Patient Outcome. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2021; 22: 114-124.

1096.

Lintz VC, Vieira RA, Carioca FL, et al. Fluid accumulation in critically ill children: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. EClinicalMedicine 2024; 74: 102714.

1097.

Gist KM, Selewski DT, Brinton J, et al. Assessment of the Independent and Synergistic
Effects of Fluid Overload and Acute Kidney Injury on Outcomes of Critically Ill
Children. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2020; 21: 170-177.

1098.

Goldstein SL, Akcan-Arikan A, Alobaidi R, et al. Consensus-Based Recommendations
on Priority Activities to Address Acute Kidney Injury in Children: A Modified Delphi
Consensus Statement. JAMA Netw Open 2022; 5: e2229442.

1099.

Sutherland SM, Zappitelli M, Alexander SR, et al. Fluid overload and mortality in
children receiving continuous renal replacement therapy: the prospective pediatric
continuous renal replacement therapy registry. Am J Kidney Dis 2010; 55: 316-325.

1100.

Goldstein SL, Currier H, Graf C, et al. Outcome in children receiving continuous
venovenous hemofiltration. Pediatrics 2001; 107: 1309-1312.

1101.

Flores S, Loomba RS, Elhoff JJ, et al. Peritoneal Dialysis Vs Diuretics in Children After
Congenital Heart Surgery. Ann Thorac Surg 2019; 108: 806-812.

R

AF
T

1094.

Namachivayam SP, Law S, Millar J, et al. Early Peritoneal Dialysis and Postoperative
Outcomes in Infants After Pediatric Cardiac Surgery: A Systematic Review and MetaAnalysis. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2022; 23: 793-800.

1103.

Ulrich EH, Bedi PK, Alobaidi R, et al. Outcomes of Prophylactic Peritoneal Dialysis
Catheter Insertion in Children Undergoing Cardiac Surgery: A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2024; 25: e291-e302.

1104.

Bojan M, Gioanni S, Vouhe PR, et al. Early initiation of peritoneal dialysis in neonates
and infants with acute kidney injury following cardiac surgery is associated with a
significant decrease in mortality. Kidney Int 2012; 82: 474-481.

1105.

Kwiatkowski DM, Alten JA, Raymond TT, et al. Peritoneal catheters in neonates
undergoing complex cardiac surgery: a multi-centre descriptive study. Cardiol Young
2024; 34: 272-281.

D

1102.

470

Ryerson LM, Mackie AS, Atallah J, et al. Prophylactic peritoneal dialysis catheter does
not decrease time to achieve a negative fluid balance after the Norwood procedure: a
randomized controlled trial. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2015; 149: 222-228.

1107.

Lambert H, Hiu S, Coulthard MG, et al. The Infant KIdney Dialysis and Utrafiltration (IKID) Study: A Stepped-Wedge Cluster-Randomized Study in Infants, Comparing
Peritoneal Dialysis, Continuous Venovenous Hemofiltration, and Newcastle Infant
Dialysis Ultrafiltration System, a Novel Infant Hemodialysis Device. Pediatr Crit Care
Med 2023; 24: 604-613.

1108.

Basu B, Mahapatra TK, Roy B, et al. Efficacy and outcomes of continuous peritoneal
dialysis versus daily intermittent hemodialysis in pediatric acute kidney injury. Pediatr
Nephrol 2016; 31: 1681-1689.

1109.

Chanchlani R, Nash DM, McArthur E, et al. Secular Trends in Incidence, Modality and
Mortality with Dialysis Receiving AKI in Children in Ontario: A Population-Based
Cohort Study. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2019; 14: 1288-1296.

1110.

Battista J, De Luca D, Eleni Dit Trolli S, et al. CARPEDIEM(R) for continuous kidney
replacement therapy in neonates and small infants: a French multicenter retrospective
study. Pediatr Nephrol 2023; 38: 2827-2837.

1111.

Goldstein SL, Vidal E, Ricci Z, et al. Survival of infants treated with CKRT: comparing
adapted adult platforms with the Carpediem. Pediatr Nephrol 2022; 37: 667-675.

1112.

Ronco C, Garzotto F, Brendolan A, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy in
neonates and small infants: development and first-in-human use of a miniaturised
machine (CARPEDIEM). Lancet 2014; 383: 1807-1813.

R

AF
T

1106.

Ceschia G, Parolin M, Longo G, et al. Expanding the Spectrum of Extracorporeal
Strategies in Small Infants with Hyperammonemia. Blood Purif 2023; 52: 729-736.

D

1113.

1114.

Kwiatkowski DM, Goldstein SL, Cooper DS, et al. Peritoneal Dialysis vs Furosemide for
Prevention of Fluid Overload in Infants After Cardiac Surgery: A Randomized Clinical
Trial. JAMA Pediatr 2017; 171: 357-364.

1115.

Bonilla-Felix M. Peritoneal dialysis in the pediatric intensive care unit setting:
techniques, quantitations and outcomes. Blood Purif 2013; 35: 77-80.

1116.

Vasudevan A, Phadke K, Yap HK. Peritoneal dialysis for the management of pediatric
patients with acute kidney injury. Pediatr Nephrol 2017; 32: 1145-1156.

1117.

Burgmaier K, Hackl A, Ehren R, et al. Peritoneal dialysis in extremely and very lowbirth-weight infants. Perit Dial Int 2020; 40: 233-236.

471

Redant S, Beretta-Piccoli X, Mugisha A, et al. Hyperammonemia, the Last Indication of
High-Volume Hemodiafiltration in Adult and Children: A Structured Review. Blood
Purif 2019; 48: 330-335.

1119.

Westrope C, Morris K, Burford D, et al. Continuous hemofiltration in the control of
neonatal hyperammonemia: a 10-year experience. Pediatr Nephrol 2010; 25: 1725-1730.

1120.

Bernal W, Hall C, Karvellas CJ, et al. Arterial ammonia and clinical risk factors for
encephalopathy and intracranial hypertension in acute liver failure. Hepatology 2007; 46:
1844-1852.

1121.

Sravani M, Krishnasamy S, Deepthi B, et al. Experience of continuous kidney
replacement therapy in a tertiary care unit of a lower-middle-income country. Pediatr
Nephrol 2025; 40: 2083-2090.

1122.

Riley AA, Watson M, Smith C, et al. Pediatric continuous renal replacement therapy:
have practice changes changed outcomes? A large single-center ten-year retrospective
evaluation. BMC Nephrol 2018; 19: 268.

1123.

Al-Ayed T, Rahman NU, Alturki A, et al. Outcome of continuous renal replacement
therapy in critically ill children: a retrospective cohort study. Ann Saudi Med 2018; 38:
260-268.

1124.

Erkol Tuncer GH, Ekim M, Okulu E, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy in
critically ill children: single-center experience. Turk J Med Sci 2021; 51: 188-194.

1125.

Lee KH, Sol IS, Park JT, et al. Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy (CRRT) in
Children and the Specialized CRRT Team: A 14-Year Single-Center Study. J Clin Med
2019; 9: 110.

1126.

Afshinnia F, Straight A, Li Q, et al. Trends in dialysis modality for individuals with acute
kidney injury. Ren Fail 2009; 31: 647-654.

D

R

AF
T

1118.

1127.

Spinale JM, Laskin BL, Sondheimer N, et al. High-dose continuous renal replacement
therapy for neonatal hyperammonemia. Pediatr Nephrol 2013; 28: 983-986.

1128.

Fleming GM, Walters S, Goldstein SL, et al. Nonrenal indications for continuous renal
replacement therapy: A report from the Prospective Pediatric Continuous Renal
Replacement Therapy Registry Group. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2012; 13: e299-304.

1129.

Cordoba J, Blei AT, Mujais S. Determinants of ammonia clearance by hemodialysis. Artif
Organs 1996; 20: 800-803.

472

McBryde KD, Kershaw DB, Bunchman TE, et al. Renal replacement therapy in the
treatment of confirmed or suspected inborn errors of metabolism. J Pediatr 2006; 148:
770-778.

1131.

Lai YC, Huang HP, Tsai IJ, et al. High-volume continuous venovenous hemofiltration as
an effective therapy for acute management of inborn errors of metabolism in young
children. Blood Purif 2007; 25: 303-308.

1132.

Arbeiter AK, Kranz B, Wingen AM, et al. Continuous venovenous haemodialysis
(CVVHD) and continuous peritoneal dialysis (CPD) in the acute management of 21
children with inborn errors of metabolism. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2010; 25: 12571265.

1133.

Haberle J, Burlina A, Chakrapani A, et al. Suggested guidelines for the diagnosis and
management of urea cycle disorders: First revision. J Inherit Metab Dis 2019; 42: 11921230.

1134.

Warady BA, Bakkaloglu S, Newland J, et al. Consensus guidelines for the prevention and
treatment of catheter-related infections and peritonitis in pediatric patients receiving
peritoneal dialysis: 2012 update. Perit Dial Int 2012; 32 Suppl 2: S32-86.

1135.

Coulthard MG, Sharp J. Haemodialysis and ultrafiltration in babies weighing under 1000
g. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 1995; 73: F162-165.

1136.

Brophy PD, Somers MJ, Baum MA, et al. Multi-centre evaluation of anticoagulation in
patients receiving continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT). Nephrol Dial
Transplant 2005; 20: 1416-1421.

R

AF
T

1130.

Deja A, Guzzo I, Cappoli A, et al. Factors influencing circuit lifetime in paediatric
continuous kidney replacement therapies - results from the EurAKId registry. Pediatr
Nephrol 2024; 39: 3353-3362.

D

1137.

1138.

Cortina G, McRae R, Chiletti R, et al. The Effect of Patient- and Treatment-Related
Factors on Circuit Lifespan During Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy in Critically
Ill Children. Pediatr Crit Care Med 2020; 21: 578-585.

1139.

Coulthard MG, Sharp J. Haemodialysing infants: theoretical limitations, and single
versus double lumen lines. Pediatr Nephrol 2001; 16: 332-334.

1140.

Sohn YB, Paik KH, Cho HY, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy in neonates
weighing less than 3 kg. Korean J Pediatr 2012; 55: 286-292.

1141.

Lion RP, Vega MR, Smith EO, et al. The effect of continuous venovenous
hemodiafiltration on amino acid delivery, clearance, and removal in children. Pediatr
Nephrol 2022; 37: 433-441.
473

Vuong KT, Vega MR, Casey L, et al. Clearance and nutrition in neonatal continuous
kidney replacement therapy using the Carpediem system. Pediatr Nephrol 2024; 39:
1937-1950.

1143.

Askenazi DJ, Goldstein SL, Koralkar R, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy for
children </=10 kg: a report from the prospective pediatric continuous renal replacement
therapy registry. J Pediatr 2013; 162: 587-592 e583.

1144.

Stenson EK, Alhamoud I, Alobaidi R, et al. Factors associated with successful liberation
from continuous renal replacement therapy in children and young adults: analysis of the
worldwide exploration of renal replacement outcomes collaborative in Kidney Disease
Registry. Intensive Care Med 2024; 50: 861-872.

1145.

Wei EY, Vuong KT, Lee E, et al. Predictors of successful discontinuation of continuous
kidney replacement therapy in a pediatric cohort. Pediatr Nephrol 2023; 38: 2221-2231.

1146.

UK Kidney Association: Acute kidney injury (AKI) in England - a report on the
nationwide collection of AKI warning test scores from 2022. UK Kidney Association,
2023.

1147.

UK Kidney Association: Acute kidney injury (AKI) in England - a report on the
nationwide collection of AKI warning test scores from 2023. UK Kidney Association,
2024.

1148.

Coca SG, Singanamala S, Parikh CR. Chronic kidney disease after acute kidney injury: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Kidney Int 2012; 81: 442-448.

R

AF
T

1142.

Coca SG, Yusuf B, Shlipak MG, et al. Long-term risk of mortality and other adverse
outcomes after acute kidney injury: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Kidney
Dis 2009; 53: 961-973.

D

1149.

1150.

Horne KL, Viramontes-Horner D, Packington R, et al. A comprehensive description of
kidney disease progression after acute kidney injury from a prospective, parallel-group
cohort study. Kidney Int 2023; 104: 1185-1193.

1151.

Karmakar S, Dasgupta D, Akhtar S, et al. Progression of acute kidney injury to chronic
kidney disease: a prospective cohort study. Pediatr Nephrol 2025; 40: 3293-3300.

1152.

Kerr M, Bedford M, Matthews B, et al. The economic impact of acute kidney injury in
England. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2014; 29: 1362-1368.

1153.

Van den Eynde J, Rotbi H, Schuermans A, et al. Long-Term Consequences of Acute
Kidney Injury After Pediatric Cardiac Surgery: A Systematic Review. J Pediatr 2023;
252: 83-92 e85.
474

Wonnacott A, Meran S, Amphlett B, et al. Epidemiology and outcomes in communityacquired versus hospital-acquired AKI. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2014; 9: 1007-1014.

1155.

Sawhney S, Marks A, Fluck N, et al. Acute kidney injury as an independent risk factor
for unplanned 90-day hospital readmissions. BMC Nephrol 2017; 18: 9.

1156.

Silver SA, Harel Z, McArthur E, et al. 30-Day Readmissions After an Acute Kidney
Injury Hospitalization. Am J Med 2017; 130: 163-172 e164.

1157.

Siew ED, Parr SK, Abdel-Kader K, et al. Predictors of Recurrent AKI. J Am Soc Nephrol
2016; 27: 1190-1200.

1158.

Vijayan A, Neyra JA. Thinking and Acting Outside the Hospitalization Box in AKI Care:
Beyond Acute Care. Advances in Kidney Disease and Health 2025; 32: 109-110.

1159.

Ng JH, Abdullah MM, Abdel-Rahman EM. Holistic Patient-Centered Outcomes in PostAcute Kidney Injury Care: Physical, Emotional, Cognitive, and Social Outcomes. Adv
Kidney Dis Health 2025; 32: 162-178.

1160.

Hsu CY, Hsu RK, Yang J, et al. Elevated BP after AKI. J Am Soc Nephrol 2016; 27:
914-923.

1161.

Siew ED, Liu KD, Bonn J, et al. Improving Care for Patients after Hospitalization with
AKI. J Am Soc Nephrol 2020; 31: 2237-2241.

1162.

Choon XY, Lumlertgul N, Cameron L, et al. Discharge Documentation and Follow-Up of
Critically Ill Patients With Acute Kidney Injury Treated With Kidney Replacement
Therapy: A Retrospective Cohort Study. Front Med (Lausanne) 2021; 8: 710228.

1163.

Tomson C, Tomlinson LA. Stopping RAS Inhibitors to Minimize AKI: More Harm than
Good? Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2019; 14: 617-619.

D

R

AF
T

1154.

1164.

KDIGO 2024 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of Chronic
Kidney Disease. Kidney Int 2024; 105: S117-s314.

1165.

Brar S, Ye F, James MT, et al. Association of Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitor
or Angiotensin Receptor Blocker Use With Outcomes After Acute Kidney Injury. JAMA
Intern Med 2018; 178: 1681-1690.

1166.

James MT, Bhatt M, Pannu N, et al. Long-term outcomes of acute kidney injury and
strategies for improved care. Nat Rev Nephrol 2020; 16: 193-205.

475

Silver SA, Adhikari NK, Bell CM, et al. Nephrologist Follow-Up versus Usual Care after
an Acute Kidney Injury Hospitalization (FUSION): A Randomized Controlled Trial. Clin
J Am Soc Nephrol 2021; 16: 1005-1014.

1168.

Silver SA, Saragosa M, Adhikari NK, et al. What insights do patients and caregivers have
on acute kidney injury and posthospitalisation care? A single-centre qualitative study
from Toronto, Canada. BMJ Open 2018; 8: e021418.

1169.

Natale P, Wu R, Hughes A, et al. Perspectives and Experiences of Patients with AKI: A
Systematic Review. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2025; 20: 326-336.

1170.

Vijayan A, Neyra JA. Thinking and Acting Outside the Hospitalization Box in AKI Care:
Beyond Acute Care. Adv Kidney Dis Health 2025; 32: 109-110.

1171.

Ly H, Ortiz-Soriano V, Liu LJ, et al. Characteristics and Outcomes of Survivors of
Critical Illness and Acute Kidney Injury Followed in a Pilot Acute Kidney Injury Clinic.
Kidney Int Rep 2021; 6: 3070-3073.

1172.

Singh G, Hu Y, Jacobs S, et al. Post-Discharge Mortality and Rehospitalization among
Participants in a Comprehensive Acute Kidney Injury Rehabilitation Program. Kidney360
2021; 2: 1424-1433.

1173.

Thanapongsatorn P, Chaikomon K, Lumlertgul N, et al. Comprehensive versus standard
care in post-severe acute kidney injury survivors, a randomized controlled trial. Crit Care
2021; 25: 322.

1174.

Wu CY, Liu JS, Chen CH, et al. Early Comprehensive Kidney Care in DialysisRequiring Acute Kidney Injury Survivors: A Populational Study. Front Med (Lausanne)
2022; 9: 847462.

1175.

Hessey E, Morissette G, Lacroix J, et al. Healthcare Utilization after Acute Kidney Injury
in the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2018; 13: 685-692.

D

R

AF
T

1167.

1176.

Robinson CH, Jeyakumar N, Luo B, et al. Long-Term Kidney Outcomes after Pediatric
Acute Kidney Injury. J Am Soc Nephrol 2024; 35: 1520-1532.

1177.

Hsieh CC, Chen SY, Chen JY, et al. Nephrologist follow-up care for the acute kidney
injury-chronic kidney disease continuum and clinical outcomes: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. J Chin Med Assoc 2024; 87: 280-286.

1178.

Wu VC, Chueh JS, Chen L, et al. Nephrologist Follow-Up Care of Patients With Acute
Kidney Disease Improves Outcomes: Taiwan Experience. Value Health 2020; 23: 12251234.

476

Ye N, Xu Y, Bellomo R, et al. Effect of nephrology follow-up on long-term outcomes in
patients with acute kidney injury: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Nephrology
(Carlton) 2020; 25: 607-615.

1180.

Harel Z, Wald R, Bargman JM, et al. Nephrologist follow-up improves all-cause
mortality of severe acute kidney injury survivors. Kidney Int 2013; 83: 901-908.

1181.

Jeffries M, Howells K, McNab D, et al. Understanding patient lived experiences of
hospital admission and aftercare following Acute Kidney Injury: A 'Lifeworld'
perspective. Soc Sci Med 2025; 389: 118800.

1182.

Mehrotra R, Davison SN, Farrington K, et al. Managing the symptom burden associated
with maintenance dialysis: conclusions from a Kidney Disease: Improving Global
Outcomes (KDIGO) Controversies Conference. Kidney Int 2023; 104: 441-454.

1183.

Siew ED, Parr SK, Wild MG, et al. Kidney Disease Awareness and Knowledge among
Survivors ofAcute Kidney Injury. Am J Nephrol 2019; 49: 449-459.

1184.

Greer RC, Liu Y, Crews DC, et al. Hospital discharge communications during care
transitions for patients with acute kidney injury: a cross-sectional study. BMC Health
Services Research 2016; 16: 449.

1185.

Nye C, Lake S. Acute kidney injury; improving the communication from secondary to
primary care. BMJ Qual Improv Rep 2017; 6: u211147.w216661.

1186.

Krishnan DM, Fang J, Ko DT, et al. Abstract 14142: Patterns of Renin Angiotensin
Aldosterone Inhibitor Use in Patients After Hospitalization With Acute Kidney Injury.
Circulation 2023; 148: A14142-A14142.

R

AF
T

1179.

Janse RJ, Fu EL, Clase CM, et al. Stopping versus continuing renin-angiotensin-system
inhibitors after acute kidney injury and adverse clinical outcomes: an observational study
from routine care data. Clin Kidney J 2022; 15: 1109-1119.

D

1187.

1188.

Siew ED, Parr SK, Abdel-Kader K, et al. Renin-angiotensin aldosterone inhibitor use at
hospital discharge among patients with moderate to severe acute kidney injury and its
association with recurrent acute kidney injury and mortality. Kidney Int 2021; 99: 12021212.

1189.

Patel HR, Pruchnicki MC, Hall LE. Assessment for chronic kidney disease service in
high-risk patients at community health clinics. Annals of Pharmacotherapy 2005; 39: 2227.

1190.

Chisavu F, Chisavu L, Ivan V, et al. Acute Kidney Disease following Acute Kidney
Injury in Children-A Retrospective Observational Cohort Study on Risk Factors and
Outcomes. J Clin Med 2024; 13.
477

Karmakar S, Dasgupta D, Akhtar S, et al. Progression of acute kidney injury to chronic
kidney disease: a prospective cohort study. Pediatr Nephrol 2025; 40: 3293-3300.

1192.

Hui WF, Chan VPY, Cheung WL, et al. Pattern and prognostic factors for kidney
function progression in survivors of children with acute kidney injury: a cohort study.
Arch Dis Child 2024; 109: 314-320.

1193.

Hui WF, Chan VPY, Cheung WL, et al. Risk factors for development of acute kidney
injury and acute kidney disease in critically ill children. J Nephrol 2023; 36: 1425-1434.

1194.

Takeda A, Martin N, Taylor RS, et al. Disease management interventions for heart
failure. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2019; 1: CD002752.

1195.

Go AS, Hsu CY, Yang J, et al. Acute Kidney Injury and Risk of Heart Failure and
Atherosclerotic Events. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2018; 13: 833-841.

1196.

Clark AL, Kalra PR, Petrie MC, et al. Change in renal function associated with drug
treatment in heart failure: national guidance. Heart 2019; 105: 904-910.

1197.

Ahmad T, Jackson K, Rao VS, et al. Worsening Renal Function in Patients With Acute
Heart Failure Undergoing Aggressive Diuresis Is Not Associated With Tubular Injury.
Circulation 2018; 137: 2016-2028.

1198.

Testani JM, Coca SG, McCauley BD, et al. Impact of changes in blood pressure during
the treatment of acute decompensated heart failure on renal and clinical outcomes. Eur J
Heart Fail 2011; 13: 877-884.

R

AF
T

1191.

Barreto EF, Cerda J, Freshly B, et al. Optimum Care of AKI Survivors Not Requiring
Dialysis after Discharge: An AKINow Recovery Workgroup Report. Kidney360 2024; 5:
124-132.

D

1199.

1200.

Manis MM, Skelley JW, Read JB, et al. Role of a Pharmacist in Postdischarge Care for
Patients With Kidney Disease: A Scoping Review. Annals of Pharmacotherapy 2024; 58:
1238-1248.

1201.

Birks P, Al-Zeer B, Holmes D, et al. Assessing Discharge Communication and Follow-up
of Acute Kidney Injury in British Columbia: A Retrospective Chart Review. Canadian
Journal of Kidney Health and Disease 2024; 11: 20543581231222064.

1202.

Howard SJ, Elvey R, Ohrnberger J, et al. Post-discharge care following acute kidney
injury: quality improvement in primary care. BMJ Open Quality 2020; 9: e000891.

478

Mena J, Rodriguez M, Sternberg SB, et al. Incidence, Recognition, and Follow-up of
Laboratory Evidence of Acute Kidney Injury in Primary Care Practices: Analysis of
93,259 Creatinine Results. Am J Med 2025; 138: 79-86.

1204.

Starr MC, Vanderkolk J, Goswami S, et al. Caregiver Awareness and Knowledge of
Acute Kidney Injury in Hospitalized Children. JAMA Netw Open 2024; 7: e2442442.

1205.

May HP, Herges JR, Anderson BK, et al. Posthospital Multidisciplinary Care for AKI
Survivors: A Feasibility Pilot. Kidney Med 2023; 5: 100734.

1206.

May HP, Krauter AK, Finnie DM, et al. Acute Kidney Injury Survivor Care Following
Hospital Discharge: A Mixed-Methods Study of Nephrologists and Primary Care
Providers. Kidney Med 2023; 5: 100586.

1207.

May HP, Herges JR, Anderson BK, et al. Improving Kidney Health Knowledge for
Acute Kidney Injury Survivors: A Multidisciplinary AKI Survivor Program. Kidney
Medicine 2024; 6: 100854.

1208.

Tsang JY, Brown B, Peek N, et al. Mixed methods evaluation of a computerised audit
and feedback dashboard to improve patient safety through targeting acute kidney injury
(AKI) in primary care. Int J Med Inform 2021; 145: 104299.

1209.

Ivers N, Jamtvedt G, Flottorp S, et al. Audit and feedback: effects on professional
practice and healthcare outcomes. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2012; 6:
CD000259.

1210.

Liu KD, Forni LG, Heung M, et al. Quality of Care for Acute Kidney Disease: Current
Knowledge Gaps and Future Directions. Kidney Int Rep 2020; 5: 1634-1642.

1211.

Leung KC, Pannu N, Tan Z, et al. Contrast-associated AKI and use of cardiovascular
medications after acute coronary syndrome. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2014; 9: 1840-1848.

D

R

AF
T

1203.

1212.

Meraz-Munoz AY, Jeyakumar N, Luo B, et al. Cardiovascular Drug Use After Acute
Kidney Injury Among Hospitalized Patients With a History of Myocardial Infarction.
Kidney Int Rep 2023; 8: 294-304.

1213.

Birks P, Al-Zeer B, Holmes D, et al. Assessing Discharge Communication and Follow-up
of Acute Kidney Injury in British Columbia: A Retrospective Chart Review. Can J
Kidney Health Dis 2024; 11: 20543581231222064.

1214.

Short A, McPeake J, Andonovic M, et al. Medication-related problems in critical care
survivors: a systematic review. Eur J Hosp Pharm 2023; 30: 250-256.

479

Jiesisibieke ZL, Tung TH, Xu QY, et al. Association of acute kidney injury with frailty in
elderly population: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ren Fail 2019; 41: 10211027.

1216.

Jung J, Lee J, Lim J-H, et al. The effects of muscle mass and quality on mortality of
patients with acute kidney injury requiring continuous renal replacement therapy.
Scientific Reports 2023; 13: 7311.

1217.

Ellis G, Gardner M, Tsiachristas A, et al. Comprehensive geriatric assessment for older
adults admitted to hospital. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2017; 9:
CD006211.

1218.

Treacy D, Hassett L, Schurr K, et al. Mobility training for increasing mobility and
functioning in older people with frailty. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2022; 6:
CD010494.

1219.

Watson KE, Dhaliwal K, Robertshaw S, et al. Consensus Recommendations for Sick Day
Medication Guidance for People With Diabetes, Kidney, or Cardiovascular Disease: A
Modified Delphi Process. American Journal of Kidney Diseases 2023; 81: 564-574.

1220.

Martindale A-M, Elvey R, Howard SJ, et al. Understanding the implementation of ‘sick
day guidance’ to prevent acute kidney injury across a primary care setting in England: a
qualitative evaluation. BMJ Open 2017; 7: e017241.

1221.

Doerfler RM, Diamantidis CJ, Wagner LA, et al. Usability Testing of a Sick-Day
Protocol in CKD. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2019; 14: 583-585.

R

AF
T

1215.

Mottes T, Menon S, Conroy A, et al. Pediatric AKI in the real world: changing outcomes
through education and advocacy-a report from the 26th Acute Disease Quality Initiative
(ADQI) consensus conference. Pediatr Nephrol 2024; 39: 1005-1014.

1223.

Pannu N, McBrien KA, Tan Z, et al. Advancing Community Care and Access to FollowUp after Acute Kidney Injury Hospitalization: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Journal of
the American Society of Nephrology 2025; 36.

1224.

Pannu N, McBrien KA, Tan Z, et al. Advancing Community Care and Access to FollowUp after Acute Kidney Injury Hospitalization: A Randomized Clinical Trial. J Am Soc
Nephrol 2025; 36: 441-450.

1225.

Bhatt M, Benterud E, Palechuk T, et al. Advancing Community Care and Access to
Follow-up After Acute Kidney Injury Hospitalization: Design of the AFTER AKI
Randomized Controlled Trial. Can J Kidney Health Dis 2024; 11: 20543581241236419.

1226.

Brar S, Ye F, James M, et al. Statin Use and Survival After Acute Kidney Injury. Kidney
Int Rep 2016; 1: 279-287.

D

1222.

480

Sawhney S, Tan Z, Black C, et al. Validation of Risk Prediction Models to Inform
Clinical Decisions After Acute Kidney Injury. Am J Kidney Dis 2021; 78: 28-37.

1228.

James MT, Pannu N, Hemmelgarn BR, et al. Derivation and External Validation of
Prediction Models for Advanced Chronic Kidney Disease Following Acute Kidney
Injury. JAMA 2017; 318: 1787-1797.

1229.

Okpechi IG, Tummalapalli SL, Chothia MY, et al. A global assessment of kidney care
workforce. Nephrology, dialysis, transplantation : official publication of the European
Dialysis and Transplant Association - European Renal Association 2024; 39: ii43-ii48.

1230.

Siew ED, Peterson JF, Eden SK, et al. Outpatient nephrology referral rates after acute
kidney injury. J Am Soc Nephrol 2012; 23: 305-312.

1231.

Parikh RV, Tan TC, Salyer AS, et al. Community-Based Epidemiology of Hospitalized
Acute Kidney Injury. Pediatrics 2020; 146: e20192821.

1232.

Chen JJ, Lee CC, Yen CL, et al. Impact of Different Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme
Inhibitors or Angiotensin Receptor Blocker Resumption Timing on Post Acute Kidney
Injury Outcomes. Kidney Int Rep 2024; 9: 3290-3300.

1233.

Murphy DP, Wolfson J, Reule S, et al. Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone System Blockade
after AKI with or without Recovery among US Veterans with Diabetic Kidney Disease. J
Am Soc Nephrol 2023; 34: 1721-1732.

1234.

Bidulka P, Fu EL, Leyrat C, et al. Stopping renin-angiotensin system blockers after acute
kidney injury and risk of adverse outcomes: parallel population-based cohort studies in
English and Swedish routine care. BMC Med 2020; 18: 195.

1235.

Gayat E, Hollinger A, Cariou A, et al. Impact of angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors or receptor blockers on post-ICU discharge outcome in patients with acute
kidney injury. Intensive Care Med 2018; 44: 598-605.

D

R

AF
T

1227.

1236.

Tan BWL, Tan BWQ, Akalya K, et al. Effect of Post-Acute Kidney Injury Use of ReninAngiotensin Inhibitors on Long-term Mortality and Major Adverse Kidney Events: A 5year Retrospective Observational Cohort Study. Kidney Med 2025; 7: 100996.

1237.

Wu PC, Lin CF, Kao CC, et al. Long‐Term Renal Outcomes of ACEI or ARB Use after
Recovery from Dialysis‐Requiring Acute Kidney Injury: A Population‐Based Cohort
Study. . Int J Gerontol 2025; 19: 109-114.

1238.

Chen J-J, Lee C-C, Yen C-L, et al. Impact of Different Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme
Inhibitors or Angiotensin Receptor Blocker Resumption Timing on Post Acute Kidney
Injury Outcomes. Kidney International Reports 2024; 9: 3290-3300.
481

Chen JY, Tsai IJ, Pan HC, et al. The Impact of Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme
Inhibitors or Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers on Clinical Outcomes of Acute Kidney
Disease Patients: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Front Pharmacol 2021; 12:
665250.

1240.

Pan HC, Chen JY, Chen HY, et al. Sodium-Glucose Cotransport Protein 2 Inhibitors in
Patients With Type 2 Diabetes and Acute Kidney Disease. JAMA Netw Open 2024; 7:
e2350050.

1241.

Pan HC, Chen JY, Chen HY, et al. GLP-1 receptor agonists' impact on cardio-renal
outcomes and mortality in T2D with acute kidney disease. Nat Commun 2024; 15: 5912.

1242.

Mima A, Tansho K, Nagahara D, et al. Incidence of acute kidney disease after receiving
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: a single-center retrospective study. PeerJ 2019;
7: e6467.

1243.

Puthucheary ZA, Rawal J, McPhail M, et al. Acute skeletal muscle wasting in critical
illness. JAMA 2013; 310: 1591-1600.

1244.

Fazzini B, Markl T, Costas C, et al. The rate and assessment of muscle wasting during
critical illness: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care 2023; 27: 2.

1245.

Bargnoux A-S, Kuster N, Cavalier E, et al. Serum creatinine: advantages and pitfalls.
Journal of Laboratory and Precision Medicine 2018; 3. doi:

AF
T

1239.

R

10.21037/jlpm.2018.08.01.

Prowle JR, Kolic I, Purdell-Lewis J, et al. Serum creatinine changes associated with
critical illness and detection of persistent renal dysfunction after AKI. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2014; 9: 1015-1023.

1247.

Schetz M, Gunst J, De Vlieger G, et al. Recovery from AKI in the critically ill: potential
confounders in the evaluation. Intensive Care Med 2015; 41: 1648-1657.

1248.

Forni LG, Darmon M, Ostermann M, et al. Renal recovery after acute kidney injury.
Intensive Care Med 2017; 43: 855-866.

1249.

Horne KL, Packington R, Monaghan J, et al. Comparing Cystatin C Estimated GFR With
Creatinine Estimated GFR in Acute Kidney Injury Recovery. Kidney International
Reports 2025; 10: 2741-2750.

1250.

Cerda J, Liu KD, Cruz DN, et al. Promoting Kidney Function Recovery in Patients with
AKI Requiring RRT. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2015; 10: 1859-1867.

D

1246.

482

Vijayan A, Delos Santos RB, Li T, et al. Effect of Frequent Dialysis on Renal Recovery:
Results From the Acute Renal Failure Trial Network Study. Kidney Int Rep 2018; 3: 456463.

1252.

Lee BJ, Hsu CY, Parikh R, et al. Predicting Renal Recovery After Dialysis-Requiring
Acute Kidney Injury. Kidney Int Rep 2019; 4: 571-581.

1253.

Clark EG, James MT, Hiremath S, et al. Predictive Models for Kidney Recovery and
Death in Patients Continuing Dialysis as Outpatients after Starting in Hospital. Clin J Am
Soc Nephrol 2023; 18: 892-903.

1254.

Ostermann M, Forni LG, Joannidis M, et al. State of the art: Renal recovery after AKI from basic science to clinical practice. Intensive Care Med 2025; 51: 1490-1507.

1255.

Sibbel S, Walker AG, Colson C, et al. Association of Continuation of Loop Diuretics at
Hemodialysis Initiation with Clinical Outcomes. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2019; 14: 95102.

1256.

Thanapongsatorn P, Chaikomon K, Lumlertgul N, et al. Comprehensive versus standard
care in post-severe acute kidney injury survivors, a randomized controlled trial. Critical
Care 2021; 25: 322.

1257.

Dolan KJ, Gist KM, Basalely A, et al. Functional outcomes in pediatric patients on renal
replacement therapy in a worldwide registry. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2025; 40: 19191930.

1258.

Shalaby MA, Alhasan KA, Sandokji IA, et al. Sepsis-Associated Acute Kidney Injury in
Critically Ill Children: Incidence and Outcomes. J Clin Med 2024; 13: 6720.

1259.

Starr MC, Banks R, Reeder RW, et al. Severe Acute Kidney Injury Is Associated With
Increased Risk of Death and New Morbidity After Pediatric Septic Shock. Pediatr Crit
Care Med 2020; 21: e686-e695.

D

R

AF
T

1251.

1260.

Flynn JT, Kaelber DC, Baker-Smith CM, et al. Clinical Practice Guideline for Screening
and Management of High Blood Pressure in Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics 2017;
140.

1261.

Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes IgAN and IgAV Work Group, Rovin BH,
Barratt J, et al. KDIGO 2025 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of
Immunoglobulin A Nephropathy (IgAN) and Immunoglobulin A Vasculitis (IgAV).
Kidney Int 2025; 108: S1-S71.

1262.

Amdani S, Conway J, George K, et al. Evaluation and Management of Chronic Heart
Failure in Children and Adolescents With Congenital Heart Disease: A Scientific
Statement From the American Heart Association. Circulation 2024; 150: e33-e50.
483

Shaddy R, Burch M, Kantor PF, et al. Sacubitril/Valsartan in Pediatric Heart Failure
(PANORAMA-HF): A Randomized, Multicenter, Double-Blind Trial. Circulation 2024;
150: 1756-1766.

1264.

Gülçek Ö N, Gülhan B, Kesici S, et al. Long-term kidney follow-up after pediatric acute
kidney support therapy for children less than 15 kg. Pediatr Nephrol 2023; 38: 38113821.

1265.

Tsuboi K, Tsuboi N, Nishi K, et al. Trajectory of kidney recovery in pediatric patients
requiring continuous kidney replacement therapy for acute kidney injury. Clin Exp
Nephrol 2022; 26: 1130-1136.

1266.

Ku E, Hsu RK, Johansen KL, et al. Recovery of kidney function after dialysis initiation
in children and adults in the US: A retrospective study of United States Renal Data
System data. PLoS Med 2021; 18: e1003546.

1267.

Hamilton AJ, Clissold RL, Inward CD, et al. Sociodemographic, Psychologic Health, and
Lifestyle Outcomes in Young Adults on Renal Replacement Therapy. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2017; 12: 1951-1961.

1268.

Institute of Medicine. Finding What Works in Health Care: Standards for Systematic
Reviews. The National Academies Press; 2011..

1269.

Institute of Medicine (US). Committee on standards for developing trustworthy clinical
practice guidelines. In: Graham R, Mancher M, Miller Wolman DW, et al., eds. Clinical
Practice Guidelines We Can Trust. National Academies Press; 2011..

R

AF
T

1263.

Brouwers MC, Kho ME, Browman GP, et al. AGREE II: advancing guideline
development, reporting and evaluation in health care. J Clin Epidemiol 2010; 63: 13081311.

D

1270.

1271.

Smith SM, Wallace E, Salisbury C, et al. A Core Outcome Set for Multimorbidity
Research (COSmm). Ann Fam Med 2018; 16: 132-138.

1272.

Higgins JPT, Thomas J, Chandler J, et al., eds. Cochrane Handbook for Systematic
Reviews of Interventions. 2nd ed. Wiley; 2019.

1273.

Berkman ND, Lohr KN, Ansari MT, et al. Grading the strength of a body of evidence
when assessing health care interventions: an EPC update. J Clin Epidemiol 2015; 68:
1312-1324.

1274.

Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al. GRADE: an emerging consensus on rating
quality of evidence and strength of recommendations. BMJ 2008; 336: 924-926.

484

Higgins JP, Altman DG, Gotzsche PC, et al. The Cochrane Collaboration's tool for
assessing risk of bias in randomised trials. BMJ 2011; 343: d5928.

1276.

Sterne JA, Hernan MA, Reeves BC, et al. ROBINS-I: a tool for assessing risk of bias in
non-randomised studies of interventions. BMJ 2016; 355: i4919.

1277.

Whiting PF, Rutjes AW, Westwood ME, et al. QUADAS-2: a revised tool for the quality
assessment of diagnostic accuracy studies. Ann Intern Med 2011; 155: 529-536.

1278.

Shea BJ, Reeves BC, Wells G, et al. AMSTAR 2: a critical appraisal tool for systematic
reviews that include randomised or non-randomised studies of healthcare interventions,
or both. BMJ 2017; 358: j4008.

D

R

AF
T

1275.

485

