Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*

Diabetes Care 2025;48(Suppl. 1):S27–S49 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-S002

Diabetes mellitus is a group of metabolic disorders of carbohydrate metabolism in
which glucose is both underutilized as an energy source and overproduced due to inappropriate gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis, resulting in hyperglycemia (1). Diabetes can be diagnosed by demonstrating increased concentrations of glucose in venous
plasma or increased A1C in the blood. Diabetes is classiﬁed conventionally into several clinical categories (e.g., type 1 or type 2 diabetes, gestational diabetes mellitus,
and other speciﬁc types derived from other causes, such as monogenic diabetes, exocrine pancreatic disorders, and high-risk medications) (2).
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS FOR DIABETES

Diabetes may be diagnosed based on A1C or plasma glucose criteria. Plasma glucose
criteria include either the fasting plasma glucose (FPG), 2-h plasma glucose (2-h PG)
during a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), or random glucose accompanied by
classic hyperglycemic symptoms (e.g., polyuria, polydipsia, and unexplained weight
loss) or hyperglycemic crises (i.e., diabetic ketoacidosis [DKA] and/or hyperglycemic
hyperosmolar state [HHS]) (Table 2.1).
Recommendations

2.1a Diagnose diabetes based on A1C or plasma glucose criteria. Plasma glucose
criteria include either the fasting plasma glucose (FPG), 2-h plasma glucose (2-h PG)
during a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), or random glucose accompanied
by classic hyperglycemic symptoms/crises (Table 2.1). B
2.1b In the absence of unequivocal hyperglycemia (e.g., hyperglycemic crises),
diagnosis requires conﬁrmatory testing (Table 2.1). B

Screening and Diagnosis of Diabetes

FPG, 2-h PG during 75-g OGTT, and A1C are appropriate for screening and diagnosis. It should be noted that detection rates of different screening tests vary in both

*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 2. Diagnosis and
classiﬁcation of diabetes: Standards of Care in
Diabetes—2025. Diabetes Care 2025;48(Suppl. 1):
S27–S49
© 2024 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.

2. DIAGNOSIS AND CLASSIFICATION OF DIABETES

The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes
the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the
components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to
evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee, an
interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of
Care annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA
standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s
clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee
members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

2. Diagnosis and Classification of
Diabetes: Standards of Care in
Diabetes—2025

S27

S28

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

Table 2.1—Criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes in nonpregnant individuals
A1C $6.5% ($48 mmol/mol). The test should be performed in a laboratory using a method
that is NGSP certiﬁed and standardized to the DCCT assay.*
OR
FPG $126 mg/dL ($7.0 mmol/L). Fasting is deﬁned as no caloric intake for at least 8 h.*
OR

OR
In an individual with classic symptoms of hyperglycemia or hyperglycemic crisis, a random
plasma glucose $200 mg/dL ($11.1 mmol/L). Random is any time of the day without
regard to time since previous meal.
DCCT, Diabetes Control and Complications Trial; FPG, fasting plasma glucose; OGTT, oral glucose tolerance test; NGSP, National Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program; WHO, World
Health Organization; 2-h PG, 2-h plasma glucose. *In the absence of unequivocal hyperglycemia, diagnosis requires two abnormal results from different tests which may be obtained
at the same time (e.g., A1C and FPG), or the same test at two different time points.

populations and individuals. FPG, 2-h PG,
and A1C reﬂect different aspects of glucose metabolism, and diagnostic cut points
for the different tests will identify groups
with incomplete concordance (3). Compared with FPG and A1C cut points, the
2-h PG value diagnoses more people
with prediabetes and diabetes (4). Moreover, the efﬁcacy of interventions for primary prevention of type 2 diabetes (i.e.,
preventing conversion of prediabetes to
type 2 diabetes) has been demonstrated
mainly among individuals with prediabetes who have impaired glucose tolerance
(IGT) with or without elevated fasting
glucose, not for individuals with isolated
impaired fasting glucose (IFG) or for
those with prediabetes deﬁned by A1C
criteria (5–8).
The same tests may be used to screen
for and diagnose diabetes and to detect
individuals with prediabetes (9) (Table 2.1
and Table 2.2). Diabetes may be identiﬁed anywhere along the spectrum of

clinical scenarios—in seemingly low-risk
individuals who happen to have glucose
testing, in individuals screened based on
diabetes risk assessment, and in symptomatic individuals. There is presently
insufﬁcient evidence to support the use
of continuous glucose monitoring (CGM)
for screening or diagnosis of prediabetes
or diabetes. For additional details on the
evidence used to establish the criteria
for the diagnosis of diabetes or prediabetes, see the American Diabetes Association (ADA) position statement “Diagnosis
and Classiﬁcation of Diabetes Mellitus”
(2) and other reports (1,3,10,11).
Use of Fasting Plasma Glucose or
2-Hour Plasma Glucose for Screening
and Diagnosis of Diabetes

In the less common clinical scenario
where a person has classic hyperglycemic symptoms (e.g., polyuria, polydipsia,
unexplained weight loss) or presents
with hyperglycemic crisis, measurement

Table 2.2—Criteria deﬁning prediabetes in nonpregnant individuals
A1C 5.7–6.4% (39–47 mmol/mol)
OR
FPG 100 mg/dL (5.6 mmol/L) to 125 mg/dL (6.9 mmol/L) (IFG)
OR

Use of A1C for Screening and
Diagnosis of Diabetes

2-h PG during 75-g OGTT 140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L) to 199 mg/dL (11.0 mmol/L) (IGT)

Recommendations

For all three tests, risk is continuous, extending below the lower limit of the range and becoming disproportionately greater at the higher end of the range. FPG, fasting plasma glucose; IFG, impaired fasting glucose; IGT, impaired glucose tolerance; OGTT, oral glucose
tolerance test; 2-h PG, 2-h plasma glucose.

2.2a The A1C test should be performed using a method that is certiﬁed by the National Glycohemoglobin
Standardization Program (NGSP) as

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

2-h PG $200 mg/dL ($11.1 mmol/L) during OGTT. The test should be performed as
described by the WHO, using a glucose load containing the equivalent of 75 g anhydrous
glucose dissolved in water.*

of random plasma glucose is sufﬁcient
to diagnose diabetes (symptoms of hyperglycemia or hyperglycemic crisis plus
random plasma glucose $200 mg/dL
[$11.1 mmol/L]). In these cases, knowing the plasma glucose level is critical because, in addition to conﬁrming that
symptoms are due to diabetes, it will inform management decisions. Health care
professionals may also want to know the
A1C to determine the chronicity of hyperglycemia. However, in an individual without symptoms, FPG or 2-h PG can be used
for screening and diagnosis of diabetes. In
nonpregnant individuals, FPG (or A1C) is
typically preferred for routine screening due
to the ease of administration (Table 2.3);
however, the 2-h PG (OGTT) testing protocol diagnoses more diabetes than the
other two tests and is preferentially recommended for screening for some conditions (e.g., cystic ﬁbrosis-related diabetes
or posttransplantation diabetes mellitus).
In the absence of classic hyperglycemic
symptoms, repeat testing is required to
conﬁrm the diagnosis regardless of the
test used (see CONFIRMING THE DIAGNOSIS,
below).
An advantage of glucose testing is that
these assays are inexpensive and widely
available. Disadvantages include the high
diurnal variation in glucose and fasting requirement. Individuals may have difﬁculty
fasting for the full 8-h period or may misreport their fasting status (Table 2.3). Recent physical activity, illness, or acute
stress can affect glucose concentrations.
Glycolysis is also an important and underrecognized concern with glucose testing.
Glucose concentrations will be falsely low
if samples are not handled properly and
promptly prior to analysis (1).
People should follow a mixed eating
pattern with at least 150 g of carbohydrates on the 3 days prior to OGTT
(12–14). Antecedent carbohydrate restriction in the days prior to OGTT can
falsely elevate postchallenge glucose levels, potentially resulting in a false-positive
OGTT (12).

diabetesjournals.org/care

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

S29

Table 2.3—Considerations related to the use and interpretation of laboratory measurements of glucose and A1C
Glucose

A1C

Inexpensive and available in most laboratories
across the world

More expensive than glucose and not as
widely available globally

Time frame of hyperglycemia

Acute measure

Chronic measure of glucose exposure over
the past 2–3 months

Preanalytic stability

Poor; plasma must be separated immediately
or samples must be kept on ice to prevent
glycolysis

Good

Sample

Measurement can vary depending on sample
type (plasma, serum, whole blood) and
source (capillary, venous, arterial)

Requires whole-blood sample

Assay standardization

Not standardized

Well standardized

Fasting

Fasting or timed samples required

Nonfasting test; no participant preparation is
needed

Within-person variability

High

Low

Acute factors that can affect levels

Food intake, stress, recent illness, activity

Unaffected by recent food intake, stress,
illness, activity

Other individual factors that can affect test
results

Diurnal variation, medications, alcohol,
smoking, bilirubin

Altered erythrocyte turnover (e.g., anemia,
iron status, splenectomy, blood loss,
transfusion, hemolysis, glucose-6phosphate dehydrogenase deﬁciency,
erythropoietin), HIV, cirrhosis, renal failure,
dialysis, pregnancy

Test interferences

Depends on speciﬁc assay: sample handling/
processing time, hemolysis, severe
hypertriglyceridemia, severe
hyperbilirubinemia

Depends on speciﬁc assay: hemoglobin
variants, severe hypertriglyceridemia,
severe hyperbilirubinemia

Data are from Selvin (217).

traceable to the Diabetes Control
and Complications Trial (DCCT) reference assay. B
2.2b Point-of-care A1C testing for diabetes screening and diagnosis should
be restricted to devices approved for
diagnosis by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration at Clinical Laboratory
Improvement Amendments–certiﬁed
laboratories that perform testing of
moderate complexity or higher by
trained personnel. B
2.3 Evaluate for the possibility of a
problem or interference with either
test when there is consistent and substantial discordance between blood
glucose values and A1C test results. B
2.4 In conditions associated with an
altered relationship between A1C and
glycemia, such as some hemoglobin
variants, pregnancy (second and third
trimesters and the postpartum period),
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deﬁciency, HIV, hemodialysis, recent
blood loss or transfusion, hemolysis,

or erythropoietin therapy, plasma
glucose criteria should be used to
diagnose diabetes. B
The A1C test should be performed using a
method that is certiﬁed by the National
Glycohemoglobin Standardization Program
(NGSP) (ngsp.org) and standardized or
traceable to the Diabetes Control and
Complications Trial (DCCT) reference assay.
Outside the U.S., some assays are NGSP
certiﬁed but many more are International
Federation of Clinical Chemistry (IFCC) certiﬁed (a similarly stringent process) (1).
Point-of-care A1C assays may be NGSP
certiﬁed and cleared by the U.S. Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in
monitoring glycemic management in people with diabetes in both Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA)–
regulated and CLIA-waived settings. FDAapproved point-of-care A1C testing can
be used in laboratories or sites that are
CLIA certiﬁed, are inspected, and meet the
CLIA quality standards. These standards

include speciﬁed personnel requirements
(including documented annual competency assessments) and participation three
times per year in an approved proﬁciency
testing program (15–18).
A1C has several advantages compared
with FPG and OGTT, including greater convenience (fasting is not required), greater
preanalytical stability, and fewer day-today perturbations during stress, changes
in nutrition, or illness. However, it should
be noted that there is lower sensitivity
of A1C at the designated cut point compared with that of 2-h PG as well as limited access in some parts of the world
(Table 2.3).
A1C reﬂects glucose bound to hemoglobin over the life span of the erythrocyte
(120 days) and is thus a “weighted” average that is more heavily affected by recent blood glucose exposure. This means
that clinically meaningful changes in A1C
can be seen in <120 days. A1C is an indirect measure of glucose exposure, and factors that affect hemoglobin concentrations
or erythrocyte turnover can affect A1C

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

Cost

S30

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

If using samples at two different time
points, it is recommended that the second test, which may be either a repeat of
the initial test or a different test, be performed in a timely manner. For example,
if the A1C is 7.0% (53 mmol/mol) and a
repeat result is 6.8% (51 mmol/mol), the
diagnosis of diabetes is conﬁrmed. Two
different tests (such as A1C and FPG)
both having results above the diagnostic
threshold when collected at the same
time or at two different time points
would also conﬁrm the diagnosis. On the
other hand, if an individual has discordant results from two different tests,
then the test result that is above the diagnostic cut point should be repeated, with
careful consideration of factors that may
affect measured A1C or glucose levels. The
diagnosis is made based on the conﬁrmatory screening test. For example, if an individual meets the diabetes criterion of A1C
(two results $6.5% [$48 mmol/mol]) but
not FPG (<126 mg/dL [<7.0 mmol/L]),
that person should nevertheless be considered to have diabetes.
If individuals have test results near
the margins of the diagnostic threshold,
the health care professional should educate the individual about the onset of
possible hyperglycemic symptoms and
repeat the test in 3–6 months.
Consistent and substantial discordance between glucose values and
A1C test results should prompt additional follow-up to determine the underlying reason for the discrepancy
(including evaluation for the possibility
of a problem or interference with either
test) and whether it has clinical implications for the individual (Table 2.3). In addition, consider other biomarkers, such as
fructosamine and glycated albumin, which
are alternative measures of chronic hyperglycemia that are approved for clinical
use for monitoring glycemic management
in people with diabetes.

Confirming the Diagnosis

CLASSIFICATION

Unless there is a clear clinical diagnosis
(e.g., individual with classic symptoms of
hyperglycemia or hyperglycemic crisis and
random plasma glucose $200 mg/dL
[$11.1 mmol/L]), conﬁrmation is necessary to establish the diagnosis. This can be
accomplished by two abnormal screening
test results, measured either at the same
time (29) or at two different time points.

Recommendation

2.5 Classify people with hyperglycemia
into appropriate diagnostic categories
to aid in personalized management. E
Diabetes is classiﬁed conventionally into
several clinical categories, although these
are being reconsidered based on genetic,

metabolomic, and other characteristics
and pathophysiology (1):
1. Type 1 diabetes (due to autoimmune
b-cell destruction, usually leading to
absolute insulin deﬁciency, including
latent autoimmune diabetes in adults)
2. Type 2 diabetes (due to a nonautoimmune progressive loss of adequate
b-cell insulin secretion, frequently on
the background of insulin resistance)
3. Speciﬁc types of diabetes due to other
causes, e.g., monogenic diabetes syndromes, diseases of the exocrine pancreas, and drug- or chemical-induced
diabetes
4. Gestational diabetes mellitus (diabetes diagnosed in the second or third
trimester of pregnancy that was not
clearly overt diabetes prior to gestation or other types of diabetes occurring throughout pregnancy, such as
type 1 diabetes).
Type 1 diabetes and type 2 diabetes are
heterogeneous diseases in which clinical
presentation and disease progression
may vary considerably. Classiﬁcation is
important for determining personalized
therapy, but some individuals cannot be
clearly classiﬁed as having type 1 or type 2
diabetes at the time of diagnosis. The traditional paradigms of type 2 diabetes
having onset only in adults and type 1 diabetes having onset only in children are
not accurate, as both diseases occur in
all age-groups. Children with type 1 diabetes often present with the hallmark
symptoms of polyuria/polydipsia, and
approximately half present with DKA
(30–32). The onset of type 1 diabetes
may be more variable in adults; they
may not present with the classic symptoms seen in children and may progress
to insulin replacement more slowly (33–35).
The features most useful in determination
of type 1 diabetes include younger age at
diagnosis (<35 years) with lower BMI
(<25 kg/m2), unintentional weight loss, ketoacidosis, and plasma glucose >360 mg/dL
(>20 mmol/L) at presentation (36) (Fig. 2.1).
Other features classically associated with
type 1 diabetes, such as ketosis without
acidosis, osmotic symptoms, family history,
or a history of autoimmune diseases, are
weak discriminators. Occasionally, people
with type 2 diabetes may present with
DKA (37), particularly members of certain
racial, ethnic, and ancestral groups (e.g.,
African American and Hispanic/Latino

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

(e.g., thalassemia or folate deﬁciency)
(Table 2.3). A1C may not be a suitable
diagnostic test in people with anemia,
people treated with erythropoietin, or
people undergoing hemodialysis or HIV
treatment (1,19,20). Some hemoglobin
variants can interfere with A1C test results, but this depends on the speciﬁc assay. For individuals with a hemoglobin
variant but normal red blood cell turnover, such as those with the sickle cell
trait, an A1C assay without interference from hemoglobin variants should
be used. An updated list of A1C assays
with interferences is available at ngsp
.org/interf.asp. Another genetic variant, X-linked glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase G202A, carried by 11% of
African American individuals in the U.S., is
associated with a decrease in A1C of
about 0.8% in homozygous men and
0.7% in homozygous women compared
with levels in individuals without the variant (21).
There is controversy regarding racial differences in A1C. Studies have found that
African American individuals have slightly
higher A1C levels than non-Hispanic White
or Hispanic people (22–25). The glucoseindependent racial difference in A1C is
small (0.3 percentage points) and may
reﬂect genetic differences in hemoglobin
or red cell turnover that vary by ancestry. There is an emerging understanding
of the genetic determinants of A1C (21),
but the ﬁeld lacks adequate genetic
data in diverse populations (26,27).
While some genetic variants might be
more common in certain race or ancestry groups, it is important that we
do not use race or ancestry as proxies
for poorly understood genetic differences. Reassuringly, studies have shown
that the association of A1C with risk for
complications appears to be similar in
African American and non-Hispanic White
populations (28).

diabetesjournals.org/care

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

S31

Flowchart for investigation of suspected type 1 diabetes in newly
diagnosed adults, based on data from White European populations
Adult with suspected type 1 diabetes1

Test islet autoantibodies2

(5–10% of adult-onset type 1 diabetes)

Type 1 diabetes

Age

<35 years

>35 years

Are there features of monogenic diabetes?3

Unclear classification7
Make clinical decision as to
how person with diabetes
should be treated

Yes

Trial of noninsulin therapy
may be appropriate 8

No
Yes

>200 pmol/L

Consider C-peptide4 test
after >3 years' duration

Are there features of
type 2 diabetes?5

Test C-peptide4

<200 pmol/L

Genetic testing for monogenic
diabetes where available6

No

Type 1
diabetes

<200 pmol/L

200–600 pmol/L

>600 pmol/L

Indeterminate 9

Type 2
diabetes

Consider repeat
C-peptide at >5 years

Figure 2.1—Flowchart for investigation of suspected type 1 diabetes in newly diagnosed adults, based on data from White European populations.
1
No single clinical feature conﬁrms type 1 diabetes in isolation. 2Glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) should be the primary antibody measured
and, if negative, should be followed by islet tyrosine phosphatase 2 (IA-2) and/or zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8) where these tests are available. In individuals who have not been treated with insulin, antibodies against insulin may also be useful. In those diagnosed at <35 years of age who have no
clinical features of type 2 diabetes or monogenic diabetes, a negative result does not change the diagnosis of type 1 diabetes, since 5–10% of people with type 1 diabetes do not have antibodies. 3Monogenic diabetes is suggested by the presence of one or more of the following features: A1C
<58 mmol/mol (<7.5%) at diagnosis, one parent with diabetes, features of a speciﬁc monogenic cause (e.g., renal cysts, partial lipodystrophy,
maternally inherited deafness, and severe insulin resistance in the absence of obesity), and monogenic diabetes prediction model probability >5%
(diabetesgenes.org/exeter-diabetes-app/ModyCalculator). 4A C-peptide test is only indicated in people receiving insulin treatment. A random sample (with concurrent glucose) within 5 h of eating can replace a formal C-peptide stimulation test in the context of classiﬁcation. If the result is
$600 pmol/L ($1.8 ng/mL), the circumstances of testing do not matter. If the result is <600 pmol/L (<1.8 ng/mL) and the concurrent glucose is
<4 mmol/L (<70 mg/dL) or the person may have been fasting, consider repeating the test. Results showing very low levels (e.g., <80 pmol/L
[<0.24 ng/mL]) do not need to be repeated. Where a person is insulin treated, C-peptide must be measured prior to insulin discontinuation to exclude severe insulin deﬁciency. Do not test C-peptide within 2 weeks of a hyperglycemic emergency. 5Features of type 2 diabetes include increased
BMI ($25 kg/m2), absence of weight loss, absence of ketoacidosis, and less marked hyperglycemia. Less discriminatory features include non-White
ethnicity, family history, longer duration and milder severity of symptoms prior to presentation, features of metabolic syndrome, and absence of a
family history of autoimmunity. 6If genetic testing does not conﬁrm monogenic diabetes, the classiﬁcation is unclear and a clinical decision should
be made about treatment. 7Type 2 diabetes should be strongly considered in older individuals. In some cases, investigation for pancreatic or other
types of diabetes may be appropriate. 8A person with possible type 1 diabetes who is not treated with insulin will require careful monitoring and
education so that insulin can be rapidly initiated in the event of glycemic deterioration. 9C-peptide values 200–600 pmol/L (0.6–1.8 ng/mL) are
usually consistent with type 1 diabetes or maturity-onset diabetes of the young but may occur in insulin-treated type 2 diabetes, particularly in
people with normal or low BMI or after long duration. Reprinted and adapted from Holt et al. (36).

adults), who may present with ketosisprone type 2 diabetes (30). This form of
diabetes is strongly inherited and is not

HLA associated. An absolute requirement for
insulin replacement therapy in affected individuals may be intermittent. It is important

for health care professionals to realize
that classiﬁcation of diabetes type is not
always straightforward at presentation

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

Islet autoantibody negative

Islet autoantibody positive

S32

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

(e.g., glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist [GLP-1 RA] or sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 [SGLT2] inhibitor therapies for
potential weight and other cardiometabolic beneﬁts) and monitoring systems.
Characterization of the underlying
pathophysiology is more precisely developed in type 1 diabetes than in type 2
diabetes. It is clear from prospective
studies that the persistent presence of
two or more islet autoantibodies is a
near-certain predictor of clinical diabetes (40). In at-risk cohorts followed from
birth or a very young age, seroconversion rarely occurs before 6 months of
age and there is a peak in seroconversion between 9 and 24 months of age
(41–43). The rate of progression is dependent on the age at ﬁrst detection of
an autoantibody, number of autoantibodies, autoantibody speciﬁcity, and autoantibody titer. Glucose and A1C levels
may rise well before the clinical onset
of diabetes (e.g., changes in FPG and
2-h PG can occur about 6 months before diagnosis) (44), making diagnosis
feasible under ideal situations of serial
monitoring of individuals at high risk of
type 1 diabetes before the onset of
DKA. Three distinct stages of type 1 diabetes have been deﬁned (Table 2.4)
and serve as a framework for research
and regulatory decision-making (38,45).
There is debate as to whether slowly
progressive autoimmune diabetes with
an adult onset should be termed latent
autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA)
or type 1 diabetes. The clinical priority
with detection of LADA is awareness
that slow autoimmune b-cell destruction can occur in adults, leading to a
long duration of marginal insulin secretory capacity. For this classiﬁcation, all
forms of diabetes mediated by autoimmune b-cell destruction independent of
age of onset are included under the rubric of type 1 diabetes. Use of the term
LADA is common and acceptable in clinical practice and has the practical impact
of heightening awareness of a population of adults likely to have progressive
autoimmune b-cell destruction (46), thus
accelerating insulin initiation prior to deterioration of glucose management or
development of DKA (34,47). At the
same time, there is evidence that application of only a single imperfect autoantibody test for determining LADA
classiﬁcation may lead to misclassiﬁcation
of some individuals with type 2 diabetes.

Diagnostic accuracy may be improved
by using higher-speciﬁcity tests, using
conﬁrmatory testing for other autoantibodies, and restricting testing to those
with clinical features suggestive of autoimmune diabetes (48).
The paths to b-cell demise and dysfunction are less well deﬁned in type 2
diabetes, but deﬁcient b-cell insulin
secretion, frequently in the setting of
insulin resistance, appears to be the
common denominator. Type 2 diabetes is associated with insulin secretory
defects related to genetic predisposition, epigenetic changes, inﬂammation,
and metabolic stress. Future classiﬁcation schemes for diabetes will likely focus
on the pathophysiology of the underlying
b-cell dysfunction (38,49–52).
TYPE 1 DIABETES
Recommendations

2.6 Screening for presymptomatic
type 1 diabetes may be done by detection of autoantibodies to insulin,
glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD),
islet antigen 2 (IA-2), or zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8). B
2.7 Autoantibody-based screening for
presymptomatic type 1 diabetes should
be offered to those with a family history of type 1 diabetes or otherwise
known elevated genetic risk. B
2.8 Having multiple conﬁrmed islet
autoantibodies is a risk factor for clinical diabetes. Testing for dysglycemia may be used to further forecast
near-term risk (Table 2.4). When multiple islet autoantibodies are identiﬁed, referral to a specialized center
for further evaluation and/or consideration of a clinical trial or approved
therapy to potentially delay development of clinical diabetes should be
considered. B
2.9 Standardized islet autoantibody
tests are recommended for classiﬁcation of diabetes in adults who have
phenotypic risk factors that overlap
with those for type 1 diabetes (e.g.,
younger age at diagnosis, unintentional weight loss, ketoacidosis, or
short time to insulin treatment). E

Immune-Mediated Diabetes

Autoimmune type 1 diabetes accounts
for 5–10% of diabetes and is caused by

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

and that misdiagnosis is common and can
occur in 40% of adults with new type 1
diabetes (e.g., adults with type 1 diabetes misdiagnosed as having type 2 diabetes). In comparison, individuals with
maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) may be misdiagnosed as having
type 1 diabetes (36). Although difﬁculties in distinguishing diabetes type may
occur in all age-groups at onset, the diagnosis generally becomes more obvious
over time in people with b-cell deﬁciency
as the degree of b-cell deﬁciency becomes clear (Fig. 2.1). One useful clinical
tool for distinguishing diabetes type is
the AABBCC approach: Age (e.g., for individuals <35 years old, consider type 1
diabetes); Autoimmunity (e.g., personal or family history of autoimmune
disease or polyglandular autoimmune
syndromes); Body habitus (e.g., BMI
<25 kg/m2); Background (e.g., family history of type 1 diabetes); Control (preferred term is “goal,” i.e., the inability to
achieve glycemic goals on noninsulin therapies); and Comorbidities (e.g., treatment
with immune checkpoint inhibitors for
cancer can cause acute autoimmune
type 1 diabetes) (36).
In both type 1 and type 2 diabetes,
genetic and environmental factors can
result in the progressive loss of b-cell
mass and/or function that manifests
clinically as hyperglycemia. Once hyperglycemia occurs, people with all forms
of diabetes are at risk for developing
the same chronic complications, although
rates of progression may differ. The identiﬁcation of individualized therapies for
diabetes in the future will be informed
by better characterization of the many
paths to b-cell demise or dysfunction
(38). Across the globe, many groups are
working on combining clinical, pathophysiological, and genetic characteristics
to more precisely deﬁne the subsets of
diabetes that are currently clustered
into the type 1 diabetes versus type 2
diabetes nomenclature with the goal of
optimizing personalized treatment approaches (39). A diagnosis of type 1 diabetes does not preclude also having
features classically associated with type 2
diabetes (e.g., insulin resistance, obesity, and other metabolic abnormalities),
and until more precise subsets are used
in clinical practice, it may be appropriate to
categorize such an individual as having features of both type 1 and type 2 diabetes to
facilitate access to appropriate treatment

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

diabetesjournals.org/care

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

S33

Table 2.4—Staging of type 1 diabetes
Stage 1
Characteristics

• Autoimmunity
• Normoglycemia
• Presymptomatic

Stage 2
• Autoimmunity
• Dysglycemia
• Presymptomatic

Stage 3
• Autoimmunity
• Overt hyperglycemia
• Symptomatic

Adapted from Skyler et al. (38). FPG, fasting plasma glucose; IFG, impaired fasting glucose; IGT, impaired glucose tolerance; 2-h PG, 2-h plasma
glucose. Alternative additional stage 2 diagnostic criteria of 30-, 60-, or 90-min plasma glucose on oral glucose tolerance test $200 mg/dL
($11.1 mmol/L) and conﬁrmatory testing in those aged $18 years have been used in clinical trials (84). Dysglycemia can be deﬁned by one
or more criteria as outlined in the table.

autoimmune destruction of the pancreatic b-cells. Autoimmune markers include
islet cell autoantibodies and autoantibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD)
(such as GAD65), insulin, the tyrosine
phosphatases islet antigen 2 (IA-2) and
IA-2b, and zinc transporter 8 (ZnT8). Numerous clinical studies are being conducted
to test various methods of preventing or
delaying type 1 diabetes in those with evidence of islet autoimmunity (trialnet.org/
our-research/prevention-studies) (40–42,
47,53,54). The disease has strong HLA associations, with linkage to the DQB1 and
DRB1 haplotypes, and genetic screening
has been used in some research studies
to identify high-risk populations. Speciﬁc
alleles in these genes can be either predisposing (e.g., DRB1*0301-DQB1*0201
[DR3-DQ2] and DRB1*0401-DQB1*0302
[DR4-DQ8]) or protective (e.g., DRB1*1501
and DQA1*0102-DQB1*0602). Stage 1 of
type 1 diabetes is deﬁned by the presence
of two or more of these autoantibodies
and normoglycemia (Table 2.4). At stage 1,
the 5-year risk of developing symptomatic
type 1 diabetes is 44% overall but varies
considerably based on number, titer, and
speciﬁcity of autoantibodies as well as age
of seroconversion and genetic risk (45).
Stage 2 includes individuals with multiple
islet autoantibodies and dysglycemia not
yet diagnostic of diabetes (dysglycemia
can be deﬁned by one or more criteria as
outlined in Table 2.4). At stage 2 of the
disease, there is 60% risk by 2 years
and 75% risk within 5 years of developing a clinical diagnosis of type 1 diabetes
(55,56). A consensus guidance provides
expert recommendations on what should
be monitored and how often these factors

should be monitored in individuals with
presymptomatic type 1 diabetes (57).
The rate of b-cell destruction is quite
variable, being rapid in some individuals
(particularly but not exclusively in infants
and children) and slow in others (mainly
but not exclusively adults) (44,58). Children and adolescents often present with
DKA as the ﬁrst manifestation of the disease, and rates in the U.S. have increased over the past 20 years (30–32).
Others have modest fasting hyperglycemia that can rapidly change to severe
hyperglycemia and/or DKA with infection
or other stress. Adults may retain sufﬁcient b-cell function to prevent DKA for
many years; such individuals may have
remission characterized by decreased insulin needs for months or years, eventually become dependent on insulin for
survival, and are at risk for DKA (33–35,
59,60). At this later stage of the disease,
there is little or no insulin secretion, as
manifested by low or undetectable levels
of plasma C-peptide. Immune-mediated
diabetes is the most common form of
diabetes in childhood and adolescence,
but it can occur at any age. Autoimmune
destruction of b-cells has multiple genetic factors and is also related to environmental factors that are still poorly
deﬁned. Although individuals did not classically have obesity when they presented
with type 1 diabetes, obesity is increasingly common in the general population;
as such, obesity should not preclude
testing for type 1 diabetes. People with
type 1 diabetes are also prone to other
autoimmune disorders, such as Hashimoto thyroiditis, Graves disease, celiac

disease, Addison disease, vitiligo, autoimmune hepatitis, myasthenia gravis,
and pernicious anemia (see Section 4,
“Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and
Assessment of Comorbidities”). Type 1
diabetes can be associated with monogenic
polyglandular autoimmune syndromes,
including immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, and X-linked
(IPEX) syndrome, which is an early-onset
systemic autoimmune, genetic disorder
caused by mutation of the forkhead box
protein 3 (FOXP3) gene, and another disorder caused by the autoimmune regulator (AIRE) gene mutation (61,62).
Introduction of immunotherapy, speciﬁcally checkpoint inhibitors, for cancer
treatment has led to unexpected adverse
events, including immune system activation precipitating autoimmune disease.
Fulminant onset of type 1 diabetes can
occur, with DKA and low or undetectable
levels of C-peptide as a marker of endogenous b-cell function (63–65). Fewer than
half of these individuals have autoantibodies that are seen in type 1 diabetes,
supporting alternate pathobiology. This
immune-related adverse event occurs in
just under 1% of checkpoint inhibitor–
treated individuals but most commonly
occurs with agents that block the programmed cell death protein 1/programmed
cell death ligand 1 pathway alone or in
combination with other checkpoint inhibitors (66). To date, the majority of immune checkpoint inhibitor–related cases
of type 1 diabetes occur in people with
high-risk HLA susceptibility haplotype for
type 1 diabetes; however, people with
either a neutral or typically protective

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

• Autoantibodies may become absent
Diagnostic criteria • Multiple islet autoantibodies • Islet autoantibodies (usually multiple)
• Diabetes by standard criteria
• No IGT or IFG, normal A1C
• Dysglycemia:
8 IFG: FPG 100–125 mg/dL (5.6–6.9 mmol/L)
or
8 IGT: 2-h PG 140–199 mg/dL
(7.8–11.0 mmol/L) or
8 A1C 5.7–6.4% (39–47 mmol/mol) or
$10% increase in A1C

S34

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

Idiopathic Type 1 Diabetes

Some forms of type 1 diabetes have no
known etiologies. Individuals have permanent insulinopenia and are prone to DKA
but have no evidence of b-cell autoimmunity. However, only a minority of people
with type 1 diabetes fall into this category.
Screening for Type 1 Diabetes Risk

The incidence and prevalence of type 1
diabetes are increasing (70). People with
type 1 diabetes often present with acute
symptoms of diabetes and markedly elevated blood glucose levels, and 25–50%
are diagnosed with life-threatening DKA
(30–32). Family history of type 1 diabetes
increases the risk of developing type 1
diabetes compared with the general population, but the majority, 90%, of individuals who develop type 1 diabetes do
not have a known relative with the disease. Multiple studies indicate that measuring islet autoantibodies in relatives of
those with type 1 diabetes (45), in children from the general population (71,72),
or in children from the general population

with high genetic risk (73) can identify
many individuals who will develop type 1
diabetes. A study reported the risk of progression to type 1 diabetes from the time
of seroconversion to autoantibody positivity in three pediatric cohorts from
Finland, Germany, and the U.S. Of the
585 children who developed more than
two autoantibodies, nearly 70% developed type 1 diabetes within 10 years
and 84% within 15 years (40). These
ﬁndings are highly signiﬁcant, because
while the German group was recruited
from offspring of parents with type 1 diabetes, the Finnish and American groups
were recruited from the general population. Remarkably, the ﬁndings in all three
groups were the same, suggesting that
the same sequence of events led to clinical disease in both “sporadic” and familial cases of type 1 diabetes. Indeed, the
risk of type 1 diabetes increases as the
number of relevant autoantibodies detected increases (53,74,75). In The Environmental Determinants of Diabetes in
the Young (TEDDY) study, type 1 diabetes
developed in 21% of 363 subjects with
at least one autoantibody at 3 years of
age (76). Such testing, coupled with education about diabetes symptoms and
close follow-up, has been shown to enable earlier diagnosis and to prevent
DKA (77,78). In several cohort studies,
up to 50% of children with only a single
autoantibody revert to being islet autoantibody negative during follow-up
(79,80). Therefore, it is recommended
that the ﬁrst autoantibody-positive test
be conﬁrmed with a second test within
3 months, preferably in a laboratory that
meets the performance standards set by
the Islet Autoantibody Standardization
Program (IASP) (57).
Type 1 diabetes genetic risk scores
have been used in newborn screening
to identify those at risk for future presentation of the disease. In a simulation
using one such genetic risk score, the
majority of those who would go on to
develop type 1 diabetes, >77%, could
be identiﬁed within just 10% of the general population, identifying a subset who
may most beneﬁt from autoantibody
testing (81). As many genetic risk studies
have been performed in populations of
European ancestry and discriminatory
ability may differ in those of different
ancestry, more large case-control cohorts from non-European populations
are still needed (82).

Screening programs are available in
Europe (e.g., Fr1da and gppad.org),
Australia (e.g., type1screen.org), and the
U.S. (e.g., trialnet.org, askhealth.org, and
cascadekids.org). General population-based
screening programs may offer broader
testing where high-quality, validated assays
and resources for appropriate follow-up of
results are available, with several countries considering making such testing part
of standard care. In 2023, Italy introduced
nationwide screening for type 1 diabetes
and celiac disease in the general population aged 1–17 years (83). Individuals who
test autoantibody positive should be
provided with or referred for counseling
about the risk of developing diabetes,
diabetes symptoms, and DKA prevention
and should be given consideration for
referral to a specialized center for further
evaluation and/or consideration of a clinical trial or approved therapy to potentially
delay development of clinical diabetes (84).
PREDIABETES AND TYPE 2
DIABETES
Recommendations

2.10 Screening for risk of prediabetes and type 2 diabetes with an assessment of risk factors or validated
risk calculator should be done in
asymptomatic adults. B
2.11a Testing for prediabetes or type 2
diabetes in asymptomatic people
should be considered in adults of
any age with overweight or obesity
who have one or more risk factors
(Table 2.5). B
2.11b For all other people, screening should begin at age 35 years. B
2.11c In people without prediabetes
or diabetes after screening, repeat
screening recommended at a minimum of 3-year intervals is reasonable,
sooner with symptoms or change in
risk (e.g., weight gain). C
2.12 To screen for prediabetes and
type 2 diabetes, FPG, 2-h PG during
75-g OGTT, and A1C are each appropriate (Table 2.1 and Table 2.2). B
2.13 When using OGTT as a screening tool for prediabetes or diabetes,
adequate carbohydrate intake (at least
150 g/day) should be assured for 3 days
prior to testing. E
2.14 Risk-based screening for prediabetes or type 2 diabetes should be
considered after the onset of puberty
or after 10 years of age, whichever

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

HLA haplotype for type 1 diabetes can
also develop checkpoint inhibitor–associated type 1 diabetes (67). To date, risk
cannot be predicted by family history or
autoantibodies, so all health care professionals administering these medications
or caring for people who have a history
of current or past exposure to these
agents should be mindful of this adverse
effect and educate and monitor individuals appropriately.
A number of viruses have been associated with type 1 diabetes, including enteroviruses such as Coxsackievirus B. During
the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)
pandemic, numbers of cases of hyperglycemia, DKA, and new diabetes increased,
suggesting that severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is a
trigger for or can unmask type 1 diabetes
(68). Possible mechanisms of b-cell damage include virus-triggered b-cell death,
immune-mediated loss of pancreatic
b-cells, and damage to b-cells because
of infection of surrounding exocrine
cells. The cytokine storm associated
with COVID-19 infection is a highly inﬂammatory state that could also contribute.
To better characterize and understand the
pathogenesis of new-onset COVID-19–
related diabetes, a global registry, CoviDIAB,
has been established (69).

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

diabetesjournals.org/care

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

Table 2.5—Criteria for screening for diabetes or prediabetes in asymptomatic
adults

2. People with prediabetes (A1C $5.7% [$39 mmol/mol], IGT, or IFG) should be tested yearly.
3. People who were diagnosed with GDM should have testing at least every 1–3 years.
4. For all other people, testing should begin at age 35 years.
5. If results are normal, testing should be repeated at a minimum of 3-year intervals, with
consideration of more frequent testing depending on initial results and risk status.
6. Individuals in other high-risk groups (e.g., people with HIV, exposure to high-risk medicines,
evidence of periodontal disease, history of pancreatitis) should also be closely monitored
GDM, gestational diabetes mellitus; IFG, impaired fasting glucose; IGT, impaired glucose tolerance.

occurs earlier, in children and adolescents with overweight (BMI $85th
percentile) or obesity (BMI $95th
percentile) and who have one or
more risk factors for diabetes. (See
Table 2.6 for evidence grading of
risk factors.) B
2.15a Consider screening people for
prediabetes or diabetes if they are
on certain medications, such as glucocorticoids, statins, thiazide diuretics,
some HIV medications, and secondgeneration antipsychotic medications, as these agents are known
to increase the risk of these conditions. C

2.15b In people who are prescribed
second-generation antipsychotic medications, screen for prediabetes and
diabetes at baseline and repeat 12–
16 weeks after medication initiation
or sooner, if clinically indicated, and
annually thereafter. B
2.16 People with HIV should be
screened for diabetes and prediabetes
with an FPG test before starting antiretroviral therapy, at the time of
switching antiretroviral therapy, and
3–6 months after starting or switching antiretroviral therapy. If initial
screening results are normal, FPG
should be checked annually. E

Table 2.6—Risk-based screening for type 2 diabetes or prediabetes in
asymptomatic children and adolescents in a clinical setting
Screening should be considered in youth* who have overweight ($85th percentile) or
obesity ($95th percentile) and who have one or more additional risk factors:
 Maternal history of diabetes or GDM during the child’s gestation
 Family history of type 2 diabetes in ﬁrst- or second-degree relative
 High-risk race, ethnicity, and ancestry (see Table 2.5)
 Signs of insulin resistance or conditions associated with insulin resistance (acanthosis
nigricans, hypertension, dyslipidemia, polycystic ovary syndrome, large- or small-forgestational-age birth weight)
GDM, gestational diabetes mellitus. *After the onset of puberty or after 10 years of age,
whichever occurs earlier. If tests are normal, repeat testing at a minimum of 3-year intervals
(or more frequently if BMI is increasing or risk factor proﬁle is deteriorating) is recommended. Reports of type 2 diabetes before age 10 years exist, and this can be considered
with numerous risk factors.

Prediabetes

Prediabetes is the term used for individuals whose glucose or A1C levels do not
meet the criteria for diabetes yet have
abnormal carbohydrate metabolism that
results in elevated glucose levels (dysglycemia) intermediate between normoglycemia
and diabetes (28,85). People with prediabetes are deﬁned by the presence of IFG
and/or IGT and/or A1C 5.7–6.4% (39–47
mmol/mol) (Table 2.2). As prediabetes is
an intermediate state between normoglycemia and diabetes, it is a signiﬁcant
risk factor for progression to diabetes
as well as cardiovascular disease and
several other cardiometabolic outcomes.
Criteria for screening for diabetes or prediabetes in asymptomatic adults are outlined in Table 2.5. Prediabetes is associated
with obesity (especially abdominal or
visceral obesity), dyslipidemia with
high triglycerides and/or low HDL cholesterol, and hypertension. The presence
of prediabetes should prompt comprehensive screening for cardiovascular risk
factors.
Diagnosis of Prediabetes

IFG is deﬁned as FPG levels from 100 to
125 mg/dL (from 5.6 to 6.9 mmol/L)
(78,84) and IGT as 2-h PG levels during
75-g OGTT from 140 to 199 mg/dL
(from 7.8 to 11.0 mmol/L) (10). It should
be noted that the World Health Organization and a number of diabetes organizations deﬁne the IFG lower limit at
110 mg/dL (6.1 mmol/L). The ADA also
initially endorsed this IFG lower limit in
1997 (10). However, in 2003 the ADA
adopted the new range of 100–125 mg/dL
(5.6–6.9 mmol/L) to better deﬁne IFG so
that the population risk of developing diabetes with IFG would be similar to that
with IGT (11).
As with the glucose measures, several
prospective studies that used A1C to predict the progression to diabetes demonstrated a strong, continuous curvilinear
association between A1C and subsequent
diabetes. In a systematic review of 44,203
individuals from 16 cohort studies with
a follow-up interval averaging 5.6 years
(range 2.8–12 years), those with A1C between 5.5% and 6.0% (between 37 and
42 mmol/mol) had a substantially increased risk of diabetes (5-year incidence
from 9% to 25%). Those with an A1C
range of 6.0–6.5% (42–48 mmol/mol)
had a 5-year risk of developing diabetes
between 25% and 50% and a relative risk

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

1. Testing should be considered in adults with overweight or obesity (BMI $25 kg/m2 or
$23 kg/m2 in individuals of Asian ancestry) who have one or more of the following risk
factors:
 First-degree relative with diabetes
 High-risk race, ethnicity, and ancestry (e.g., African American, Latino, Native American,
Asian American)
 History of cardiovascular disease
 Hypertension ($130/80 mmHg or on therapy for hypertension)
 HDL cholesterol level <35 mg/dL (<0.9 mmol/L) and/or triglyceride level >250 mg/dL
(>2.8 mmol/L)
 Individuals with polycystic ovary syndrome
 Physical inactivity
 Other clinical conditions associated with insulin resistance (e.g., severe obesity,
acanthosis nigricans, metabolic dysfunction–associated steatotic liver disease)

S35

S36

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

Type 2 Diabetes

Type 2 diabetes accounts for 90–95% of all
diabetes. This form encompasses individuals

who generally have relative (rather than
absolute) insulin deﬁciency and have insulin resistance (i.e., decreased biological responses to insulin).
There are various causes of type 2 diabetes. Although the speciﬁc etiologies
are not known, individuals do not have
any of the other known causes of diabetes. Most, but not all, people with type 2
diabetes have overweight or obesity. Excess weight itself causes some degree of
insulin resistance. Individuals who do not
have obesity or overweight by traditional
weight criteria may have an increased percentage of body fat distributed predominantly in the abdominal region, including
sites involved in metabolic dysfunction–
associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD)
and/or ectopic sites (e.g., skeletal muscle).
DKA seldom occurs spontaneously in
type 2 diabetes (30); when seen, it usually
arises in individuals who are insulinopenic
and already treated with insulin (e.g.,
missed or inadequate doses); in people
with ketosis-prone type 2 diabetes; in association with the stress of another illness
such as infection (e.g., COVID-19) or myocardial infarction; in association with illicit
drug use (e.g., cocaine); in association
with certain social determinants of health;
or with the use of certain medications
such as glucocorticoids, second-generation
antipsychotics, or SGLT2 inhibitors (89,90).
HHS is more typically associated with type
2 diabetes (existing or new diagnosis) and
is characterized by severe hyperglycemia,
hyperosmolality, and dehydration in the
absence of signiﬁcant ketoacidosis. People with diabetes can also have mixed
clinical features of both DKA and HHS
(30).
Type 2 diabetes frequently goes undiagnosed for many years, because hyperglycemia develops gradually and, at
earlier stages, is often not severe enough
for the individual to notice the classic diabetes symptoms caused by hyperglycemia, such as dehydration or unintentional
weight loss. Nevertheless, even undiagnosed people with diabetes are at increased risk of developing macrovascular
and microvascular complications.
People with type 2 diabetes early in
the disease course may have insulin levels
that appear normal or elevated, yet the
failure to normalize blood glucose reﬂects
a relative defect in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion that is insufﬁcient to compensate for insulin resistance. Insulin
resistance may improve with weight

reduction, physical activity, and/or pharmacologic treatment of hyperglycemia but is
seldom restored to normal. Recent interventions with intensive nutritional changes
and exercise, newer pharmacological agents
(e.g., GLP-1 RAs), or surgical weight loss can
lead to diabetes remission (91–94) (see
Section 8, “Obesity and Weight Management for the Prevention and Treatment of
Type 2 Diabetes”).
The risk of developing type 2 diabetes
increases with age, obesity, and lack of
physical activity (95,96). It occurs more
frequently in individuals with prediabetes,
prior gestational diabetes mellitus, or
polycystic ovary syndrome. It is also more
common in people with hypertension or
dyslipidemia and in certain racial, ethnic,
and ancestral subgroups (Table 2.5). It is
often associated with a strong genetic
predisposition or family history in ﬁrstdegree relatives (more so than type 1 diabetes). However, the genetics of type 2
diabetes are poorly understood and under
intense investigation in this era of precision medicine (50). The composition of
the gut microbiome may also affect the
likelihood of developing type 2 diabetes
(97). In adults without traditional risk factors for type 2 diabetes and/or of younger
age, consider islet autoantibody testing
(e.g., GAD autoantibodies) to exclude the
diagnosis of type 1 diabetes (36) (Fig. 2.1).
Screening and Testing for
Prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes in
Asymptomatic Adults

Screening for prediabetes and type 2 diabetes risk through a targeted assessment
of risk factors (Table 2.5) or with an assessment tool, such as the ADA risk test
(Fig. 2.2) (diabetes.org/diabetes-risk-test),
is recommended to guide health care
professionals on whether performing a diagnostic test (Table 2.1) is appropriate.
Prediabetes and type 2 diabetes meet criteria for conditions in which early detection via screening is appropriate. Both
conditions are common and impose signiﬁcant clinical and public health burdens.
There is often a long presymptomatic
phase before the diagnosis of type 2 diabetes. Simple tests to detect preclinical
disease are readily available (98). The duration of glycemic burden is a strong predictor of adverse outcomes. There are
effective interventions that prevent progression from prediabetes to diabetes. It
is important to individualize the risk-tobeneﬁt ratio of formal intervention for

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

20 times higher than that with A1C of
5.0% (31 mmol/mol) (86). In a community-based study of African American and
non-Hispanic White adults without diabetes, baseline A1C was a stronger
predictor of subsequent diabetes and
cardiovascular events than fasting glucose (87). Other analyses suggest that
A1C of 5.7% (39 mmol/mol) or higher
is associated with a diabetes risk similar to that of the high-risk participants
in the Diabetes Prevention Program
(DPP) (88), and A1C at baseline was a
strong predictor of the development
of glucose-deﬁned diabetes during the
DPP and its follow-up (7).
An A1C range of 5.7–6.4% (39–
47 mmol/mol) identiﬁes a group of individuals at high risk for diabetes and cardiovascular outcomes. These individuals
should be informed of their increased
risk for diabetes and cardiovascular disease and counseled about effective strategies to lower their risks (see Section 3,
“Prevention or Delay of Diabetes and
Associated Comorbidities”). Similar to glucose measurements, the continuum of
risk is continuous and curvilinear: as A1C
rises, the diabetes risk rises disproportionately (86). Aggressive interventions and
vigilant follow-up should be pursued for
those considered at very high risk (e.g.,
those with A1C >6.0% [>42 mmol/mol]
and individuals with both IFG and IGT).
Table 2.5 outlines the criteria for
screening for prediabetes. The ADA risk
test is an additional option (i.e., an
awareness tool for the layperson and
the health care professional) for assessment to determine the appropriateness
of screening for diabetes or prediabetes
in asymptomatic adults (Fig. 2.2) (diabetes.org/diabetes-risk-test). For additional background regarding risk factors and screening for prediabetes, see
screening and testing for prediabetes
and type 2 diabetes in asymptomatic
adults and screening and testing for
prediabetes and type 2 diabetes in children and adolescents, below. For details
regarding individuals with prediabetes
most likely to beneﬁt from a formal behavioral or lifestyle intervention, see Section 3, “Prevention or Delay of Diabetes
and Associated Comorbidities.”

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

diabetesjournals.org/care

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

S37

Are you at risk for type 2 diabetes?
Height

1. How old are you?
Less than 40 years (0 points)
40–49 years (1 point)
50–59 years (2 points)
60 years or older (3 points)

2. Are you a man or a woman?
Woman (0 points)

3. If you are a woman, have you ever been diagnosed
with gestational diabetes?
Yes (1 point)

No (0 points)

4. Do you have a mother, father, sister or brother
with diabetes?
Yes (1 point)

No (0 points)

5. Have you ever been diagnosed with high
blood pressure?
Yes (1 point)

No (0 points)

6. Are you physically active?
Yes (0 points)

No (1 point)

7. What is your weight category?

119–142

143–190

191+

4´ 11˝

124–147

148–197

198+

5´ 0˝

128–152

153–203

204+

5´ 1˝

132–157

158–210

211+

5´ 2˝

136–163

164–217

218+

5´ 3˝

141–168

169–224

225+

5´ 4˝

145–173

174–231

232+
240+

5´ 5˝

150–179

180–239

5´ 6˝

155–185

186–246

247+

5´ 7˝

159–190

191–254

255+

5´ 8˝

164–196

197–261

262+

5´ 9˝

169–202

203–269

270+

5´ 10˝

174–208

209–277

278+

5´ 11˝

179–214

215–285

286+

6´ 0˝

184–220

221–293

294+
302+

6´ 1˝

189–226

227–301

6´ 2˝

194–232

233–310

311+

6´ 3˝

200–239

240–318

319+

6´ 4˝

205–245

246–327

328+

1 point

2 points

3 points

If you weigh less than the amount
in the left column: 0 points

See chart at right.

Adapted from Bang et al., Ann Intern Med
151:775–783, 2009 • Original algorithm was validated
without gestational diabetes as part of the model

If you scored 5 or higher:

ADD UP
YOUR SCORE

You are at increased risk for having type 2 diabetes.
However, only your doctor can tell for sure if you do
have type 2 diabetes or prediabetes, a condition in
which blood glucose levels are higher than normal but
not yet high enough to be diagnosed as diabetes. Talk
to your doctor to see if additional testing is needed.
Type 2 diabetes is more common in African Americans,
Hispanic/Latino individuals, Native Americans, Asian
Americans, and Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders.
Higher body weight increases diabetes risk for
everyone. Asian Americans are at increased diabetes
risk at lower body weight than the rest of the general
public (about 15 pounds lower).

Lower your risk:
The good news is you can manage
your risk for type 2 diabetes. Small
steps make a big difference in helping
you live a longer, healthier life.
If you are at high risk, your first step is
to visit your doctor to see if additional
testing is needed.
Visit diabetes.org or call
1–800–DIABETES (800–342–2383) for
information, tips on getting started,
and ideas for simple, small steps you
can take to help lower your risk

Diabetes Risk Test | American Diabetes Association®

Man (1 point)

Weight (lbs.)

4´ 10˝

Learn more at diabetes.org/diabetes-risk-test | 1-800-DIABETES (800-342-2383)

Figure 2.2—ADA risk test (diabetes.org/diabetes-risk-test).

people with prediabetes and consider
person-centered goals. Risk models have
explored the beneﬁt, in general ﬁnding
higher beneﬁt of intervention in those at

highest risk (99) (see Section 3, “Prevention
or Delay of Diabetes and Associated
Comorbidities”) and reduced risk of diabetes complications (100) (see Section 10,

“Cardiovascular Disease and Risk Man
agement,” Section 11, “Chronic Kidney
Disease and Risk Management,” and Section 12, “Retinopathy, Neuropathy, and

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

WRITE YOUR SCORE
IN THE BOX.

Diabetes Risk Test

S38

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

Age

Age is a major risk factor for diabetes.
Testing should begin at no later than age
35 years for all people (103). Screening
should be considered in adults of any age
with overweight or obesity and one or
more risk factors for diabetes.

People With HIV

People with HIV are at higher risk for developing prediabetes and diabetes. In addition, some antiretroviral (ARV) therapies
may further increase the risk. Therefore, a
screening protocol for prediabetes and
type 2 diabetes is recommended (106). As
the A1C test may underestimate glycemia
in people with HIV, plasma glucose criteria
are preferred to diagnose prediabetes and
diabetes (20).
Diabetes risk is increased with certain
protease inhibitors (PIs) and nucleoside/
nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors
(NRTIs). New-onset diabetes is estimated
to occur in more than 5% of individuals
infected with HIV on PIs, whereas more
than 15% may have prediabetes (107).
PIs are associated with insulin resistance
and may also lead to apoptosis of pancreatic b-cells. NRTIs also affect fat distribution (both lipohypertrophy and lipoatrophy),
which is associated with insulin resistance.
For people with HIV and ARV-associated
hyperglycemia, it may be appropriate
to consider discontinuing the problematic ARV agents if safe and effective alternatives are available (108). Before making
ARV substitutions, carefully consider the
possible effect on HIV virological control
and the potential adverse effects of new
ARV agents. In some cases, antihyperglycemic agents may still be necessary.

Medications

Certain medications, such as glucocorticoids, statins (104), thiazide diuretics,
some HIV medications (19), and secondgeneration antipsychotic medications
(105), should be considered when deciding whether to screen for prediabetes or diabetes, as these medications
are known to increase the risks of these
conditions.
For example, people taking secondgeneration antipsychotic medications require greater monitoring because of an increase in risk of type 2 diabetes associated
with this medication (105). There is a
range of effects on metabolic parameters (e.g., hyperglycemia, dyslipidemia,
and weight gain) across second-generation
antipsychotic medications. People treated
with these agents should be screened for
prediabetes or diabetes at baseline, rescreened 12–16 weeks after medication
initiation, and screened annually thereafter (105). Repeat testing can occur sooner
if clinically warranted.

Testing Interval

The appropriate interval between screening tests is not known (109). The rationale for the 3-year interval is that with
this interval, the number of false-positive
tests that require conﬁrmatory testing
will be reduced, and individuals with
false-negative tests will be retested before
substantial time elapses and complications
develop (109). In especially high-risk individuals such as those with previous values nearer to the diabetes diagnostic cut
point, shorter intervals between screenings may be useful.
Community Screening

Ideally, screening should be carried out
within a health care setting (including appropriately resourced pharmacies) because
of the need for follow-up and treatment.
Community screening outside a health
care setting is generally not recommended
because people with positive tests may
not seek, or have access to, appropriate

follow-up testing and care. However, in speciﬁc situations where an adequate referral
system is established beforehand for positive tests, community screening may be
considered. Community screening may also
be poorly targeted; i.e., it may fail to reach
the groups most at risk and inappropriately
test those at very low risk or even those
who have already been diagnosed (110).
Screening in Dental Practices

Because of the bidirectional relationship
between periodontal disease and diabetes,
the utility of screening in a dental setting
and referral to primary care as a means to
improve the diagnosis of prediabetes and
diabetes has been explored (111,112). For
example, one study estimated that 30% of
individuals $30 years of age seen in general dental practices (including both people with and without periodontal disease)
had newly diagnosed dysglycemia (112).
Further research is needed to demonstrate the feasibility, effectiveness, and
cost-effectiveness of screening in this
setting. For additional background on
oral health in relation to prediabetes
and type 2 diabetes, see Section 4,
“Comprehensive Medical Evaluation and
Assessment of Comorbidities.”
Screening and Testing for
Prediabetes and Type 2 Diabetes in
Children and Adolescents

The epidemiologic studies that formed
the basis for the recommendations to use
A1C and plasma glucose criteria to diagnose prediabetes and diabetes included
only adult populations (113). However,
ADA clinical guidance concluded that A1C,
FPG, or 2-h PG also could be used to test
for prediabetes or type 2 diabetes in children and adolescents (114).
In the last decade, the incidence and
prevalence of type 2 diabetes in children
and adolescents has increased dramatically, especially in certain high-risk racial,
ethnic, and ancestral subgroups (115).
See Table 2.6 for recommendations on
risk-based screening for type 2 diabetes
or prediabetes in asymptomatic children
and adolescents in a clinical setting (114).
See Table 2.1 and Table 2.2 for the criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes and
prediabetes, respectively, that apply to
children, adolescents, and adults. See Section 14, “Children and Adolescents,” for

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

Foot Care”). In the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) Diabetes Prevention Program
Outcomes Study (DPPOS) report, prevention of progression from prediabetes to diabetes (101) resulted in lower rates of
developing retinopathy and nephropathy
(102). Similar impact on diabetes complications was reported with screening,
diagnosis, and comprehensive risk factor
management in the U.K. Clinical Practice Research Datalink database (100).
In that report, progression from prediabetes to diabetes augmented risk of
complications.
Despite the numerous beneﬁts of screening and early diagnosis for prediabetes or
diabetes, unfortunately many people in
the U.S. and globally either remain undiagnosed or are diagnosed late, when
complications have already arisen.
Additional considerations regarding
testing for type 2 diabetes and prediabetes in asymptomatic individuals are described below.

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

diabetesjournals.org/care

additional information on type 2 diabetes
in children and adolescents.
PANCREATIC DIABETES OR
DIABETES IN THE CONTEXT OF
DISEASE OF THE EXOCRINE
PANCREAS

2.17 Screen people for diabetes within
3–6 months following an episode of
acute pancreatitis and annually thereafter. Screening for diabetes is recommended annually for people with
chronic pancreatitis. E
Pancreatic diabetes (also termed pancreatogenic diabetes or type 3c diabetes)
includes both structural (e.g., destruction
or removal of normal pancreatic tissue)
and functional loss of glucose-normalizing
insulin secretion in the context of exocrine pancreatic dysfunction and is commonly misdiagnosed as type 2 diabetes.
The diverse set of etiologies includes
pancreatitis (acute and chronic pancreatic inﬂammation and associated ﬁbrosis
leading to loss of functional exocrine and
endocrine pancreatic function), trauma
or pancreatectomy, neoplasia, cystic ﬁbrosis
(addressed later in this section), hemochromatosis, ﬁbrocalculous pancreatopathy,
rare genetic disorders, and idiopathic forms
(2); as such, pancreatic diabetes is the preferred umbrella term (116).
Acute (even a single bout) and chronic
pancreatitis can lead to postpancreatitis
diabetes mellitus (117). A distinguishing
feature is concurrent pancreatic exocrine
insufﬁciency (consider screening individuals with acute and chronic pancreatitis
for exocrine pancreatic insufﬁciency by
measuring fecal elastase), pathological
pancreatic imaging (endoscopic ultrasound, MRI, and computed tomography),
and absence of type 1 diabetes–associated
autoimmunity (118–122). There is loss of
both insulin and glucagon secretion and
often higher-than-expected insulin requirements. Risk for microvascular complications appears to be similar to that
of other forms of diabetes.
For people with pancreatitis and diabetes, therapy should be advanced if A1C
goals are not met. Glucose-lowering
therapies potentially associated with
increased risk of pancreatitis (i.e., incretinbased therapies) should be avoided. Early
initiation of insulin therapy should be

considered. In the context of pancreatectomy, islet autotransplantation can be
considered for selected individuals with
medically refractory chronic pancreatitis in
specialized centers to preserve endogenous islet function and insulin secretion
(123,124). In some cases, autotransplant
can lead to insulin independence. In
others, it may decrease insulin requirements (125).
Cystic Fibrosis–Related Diabetes
Recommendations

2.18 Annual screening for cystic ﬁbrosis–related diabetes (CFRD) with
an OGTT should begin by age 10 years
in all people with cystic ﬁbrosis not
previously diagnosed with CFRD. B
2.19 A1C is not recommended as a
screening test for CFRD due to low
sensitivity. However, a value of $6.5%
($48 mmol/mol) is consistent with a
diagnosis of CFRD. B
2.20 Beginning 5 years after the diagnosis of CFRD, annual monitoring
for complications of diabetes is recommended. E
Cystic ﬁbrosis is a multisystem condition
arising from recessive mutations in the
gene encoding the cystic ﬁbrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR)
protein. Pancreatic exocrine damage,
which can begin as early as infancy, ultimately leads to pancreatic exocrine insufﬁciency (126). Cystic ﬁbrosis–related
diabetes (CFRD) is a common comorbidity in people with cystic ﬁbrosis, occurring in about 20% of adolescents and
40–50% of adults (127). The relevance of
CFRD is highlighted by its association
with increased morbidity, mortality, and
patient burden. Diabetes in this population, compared with individuals with
type 1 or type 2 diabetes, is associated
with worse nutritional status, more severe inﬂammatory lung disease, and
greater mortality. Insulin insufﬁciency is
the primary defect in CFRD. Genetically
determined b-cell function and insulin
resistance associated with infection and
inﬂammation may also contribute to
the development of CFRD.
Milder abnormalities of glucose tolerance are even more common and occur
at earlier ages than CFRD. Whether individuals with IGT should be treated with
insulin replacement has not currently
been determined. Although screening for

diabetes before the age of 10 years can
identify risk for progression to CFRD in
those with abnormal glucose tolerance,
no beneﬁt has been established with
respect to weight, height, BMI, or lung
function. OGTT is the recommended
screening test for CFRD. Not unexpectedly, annual OGTTs are perceived as burdensome, and engagement in current
CFRD screening guidelines is poor, with
only 30% of adults with cystic ﬁbrosis
having annual OGTTs (128). A1C is not
recommended for screening due to low
sensitivity; however, a value of $6.5%
($48 mmol/mol) is consistent with a
diagnosis of CFRD and reduces patient
screening burden (129–131). Regardless
of age, weight loss or failure of expected
weight gain is a risk for CFRD and should
prompt screening (129,130). The Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation Patient Registry
(132) evaluated 3,553 people with cystic
ﬁbrosis and identiﬁed 445 (13%) with
CFRD. Early diagnosis and treatment of
CFRD was associated with preservation
of lung function. The European Cystic Fibrosis Society Patient Registry reported
an increase in CFRD with age (10% increase per decade), genotype, decreased
lung function, and female sex (133). CGM
or HOMA of b-cell function (134) may be
more sensitive than OGTT to detect risk
for progression to CFRD; however, evidence linking these results to long-term
outcomes is lacking, and these tests are
not recommended for screening outside
the research setting (127). There is inadequate evidence presently to alter CFRD
screening based on use of highly effective CFTR modulator therapy, which uses
small-molecule compounds that directly
correct the basic defect of the CFTR channel and restore channel function (127).
CFRD mortality has signiﬁcantly decreased over time, and the gap in mortality between people with cystic ﬁbrosis
with and without diabetes has considerably narrowed (135). There are limited
clinical trial data on optimal therapy for
CFRD. People with CFRD should be treated
with insulin to attain individualized glycemic goals. See Section 9, “Pharmacologic
Approaches to Glycemic Treatment,” for
further information.
Additional resources for the clinical management of CFRD can be found in the position statement “Clinical Care Guidelines for
Cystic Fibrosis-Related Diabetes” (136) and
in the International Society for Pediatric

S39

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

Recommendation

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

S40

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

and Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD) 2022 clinical practice consensus guidelines (127).
POSTTRANSPLANTATION
DIABETES MELLITUS
Recommendations

Several terms are used in the literature
to describe the presence of diabetes
following organ transplantation (137).
New-onset diabetes after transplantation (NODAT) is one such designation
that describes individuals who develop
new-onset diabetes following transplant.
NODAT excludes people with pretransplant diabetes that was undiagnosed as
well as posttransplant hyperglycemia that
resolves by the time of discharge (138).
Another term, posttransplantation diabetes mellitus (PTDM) (138,139), describes
the presence of diabetes in the posttransplant setting irrespective of the
timing of diabetes onset (140). The clinical importance of PTDM lies in its impact
as a signiﬁcant risk factor for cardiovascular disease and chronic kidney disease
in solid-organ transplantation (137).
Hyperglycemia is very common during
the early posttransplant period, with 90%
of kidney allograft recipients exhibiting
hyperglycemia in the ﬁrst few weeks
following transplant (138,139,141,142).
In most cases, such stress- or steroidinduced hyperglycemia resolves by the
time of discharge (142,143). Although
the use of immunosuppressive therapies is a major contributor to the development of PTDM, the risks of transplant
rejection outweigh the risks of PTDM,
and the role of the diabetes health care
professional is to treat hyperglycemia
appropriately regardless of the type of
immunosuppression (138). Risk factors for
PTDM include both general diabetes

risks (such as age, family history of diabetes, and obesity) and transplant-speciﬁc
factors, such as use of immunosuppressant agents (144–146). Whereas posttransplantation hyperglycemia is an
important risk factor for subsequent
PTDM, a formal diagnosis of PTDM is
optimally made once the individual is stable
on maintenance immunosuppression (usually at least 45 days) and in the absence of
acute infection (138,142–144,147).
The OGTT is recommended for the diagnosis of PTDM (1 year posttransplant)
(138,139,148). However, screening people
with FPG and/or A1C can identify high-risk
individuals who require further assessment and may reduce the number of
overall OGTTs required.
Few randomized controlled studies have
reported on the short- and long-term use
of antihyperglycemic agents in the setting
of PTDM (144,149,150). Most studies have
reported that transplant individuals with
hyperglycemia and PTDM after transplantation have higher rates of rejection, infection, and rehospitalization (142,144,151).
Insulin therapy is the agent of choice for
the management of hyperglycemia and
diabetes in the hospital setting and can
be continued postdischarge. Noninsulin
glucose-lowering therapies can also be
used for long-term management. The
choice of agent is usually made based
on the side effect proﬁle of the medication, possible interactions with the individual’s immunosuppression plan, and
potential cardiovascular and renal beneﬁts in individuals with PTDM (144).
See Section 9, “Pharmacologic Approaches
to Glycemic Treatment,” for further
information.
MONOGENIC DIABETES
SYNDROMES
Recommendations

2.24a Regardless of current age, all
people diagnosed with diabetes in the
ﬁrst 6 months of life should have genetic testing for neonatal diabetes. B
2.24b Children and young adults who
do not have typical characteristics of
type 1 or type 2 diabetes and family
history of diabetes in successive generations (suggestive of an autosomal
dominant pattern of inheritance) should
have genetic testing for maturityonset diabetes of the young (MODY). B
2.24c In both instances, consultation
with a center specializing in diabetes

genetics is recommended to understand the signiﬁcance of genetic mutations and how best to approach
further evaluation, treatment, and
genetic counseling. E
Monogenic defects that cause b-cell dysfunction (e.g., neonatal diabetes and
MODY) or insulin resistance syndromes
(e.g., monogenic lipodystrophies) are present in a small fraction of people with diabetes (<5%) (152). Table 2.7 describes
the most common causes of monogenic
diabetes. For a comprehensive list of
causes, see Genetic Diagnosis of Endocrine Disorders (153) and ISPAD 2022 clinical practice consensus guidelines (152).
Diagnosis of Monogenic Diabetes

The diagnosis of monogenic diabetes
should be considered in children and adults
diagnosed with diabetes in early adulthood
with the following ﬁndings:
• Diabetes diagnosed within the ﬁrst 6
months of life (152,154)
• Diabetes without typical features of
type 1 or type 2 diabetes (negative
diabetes-associated autoantibodies,
no obesity, and lacking other metabolic
features, especially strong family history of diabetes)
• Stable, mild fasting hyperglycemia
(100–150 mg/dL [5.6–8.5 mmol/L]),
stable A1C between 5.6% and 7.6%
(between 38 and 60 mmol/mol), especially if no obesity
Neonatal Diabetes

Diabetes occurring under 6 months of
age is termed neonatal diabetes, and
about 80–85% of cases can be found to
have an underlying monogenic cause
(36,154–157). Neonatal diabetes occurs
much less often after 6 months of age,
whereas autoimmune type 1 diabetes
rarely occurs before 6 months of age.
Neonatal diabetes can either be transient
or permanent. Transient diabetes is most
often due to overexpression of genes on
chromosome 6q24, is recurrent in about
half of cases, and may be treatable with
medications other than insulin. Permanent neonatal diabetes is most commonly
due to autosomal dominant mutations in
the genes encoding the Kir6.2 subunit
(KCNJ11) and SUR1 subunit (ABCC8) of the
b-cell KATP channel.

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

2.21 After organ transplantation,
screening for hyperglycemia should be
done. A formal diagnosis of posttransplantation diabetes mellitus (PTDM) is
best made once the individual is stable
on an immunosuppressive plan and in
the absence of an acute infection. B
2.22 The OGTT is the preferred test
to make a diagnosis of PTDM. B
2.23 Immunosuppressive plans shown
to provide the best outcomes for individuals and graft survival should be
used, irrespective of PTDM risk. E

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

diabetesjournals.org/care

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

S41

Table 2.7—Most common causes of monogenic diabetes

MODY

Inheritance

HNF1A

AD

HNF4A

AD

HNF1B

AD

GCK

AD

KCNJ11

AD

INS
ABCC8

AD
AD

6q24 (PLAGL1,
HYMA1)

AD for paternal
duplications

GATA6

AD

EIF2AK3

AR

EIF2B1

AD

FOXP3

X-linked

Clinical features
HNF1A-MODY: progressive insulin secretory defect with presentation in
adolescence or early adulthood; lowered renal threshold for glucosuria;
large rise in 2-h PG level on OGTT (>90 mg/dL [>5 mmol/L]); low
hs-CRP; sensitive to sulfonylureas
HNF4A-MODY: progressive insulin secretory defect with presentation in
adolescence or early adulthood; may have large birth weight
(macrosomia) and transient neonatal hypoglycemia; sensitive to
sulfonylureas
HNF1B-MODY: developmental renal disease (typically cystic); genitourinary
abnormalities; atrophy of the pancreas; hyperuricemia; gout
GCK-MODY: higher glucose threshold (set point) for glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion, causing stable, nonprogressive elevated fasting blood
glucose; typically does not require treatment; microvascular
complications are rare; small rise in 2-h PG level on OGTT (<54 mg/dL
[<3 mmol/L])
Permanent or transient: IUGR; possible developmental delay and seizures;
responsive to sulfonylureas
Permanent: IUGR; insulin requiring
Permanent or transient: IUGR; rarely developmental delay; responsive to
sulfonylureas
Transient: IUGR; macroglossia; umbilical hernia; mechanisms include
UPD6, paternal duplication, or maternal methylation defect; may be
treatable with medications other than insulin
Permanent: pancreatic hypoplasia; cardiac malformations; pancreatic
exocrine insufﬁciency; insulin requiring
Permanent: Wolcott-Rallison syndrome: epiphyseal dysplasia; pancreatic
exocrine insufﬁciency; insulin requiring
Permanent diabetes: can be associated with ﬂuctuating liver function
(154)
Permanent: immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy
X-linked (IPEX) syndrome: autoimmune diabetes, autoimmune thyroid
disease, exfoliative dermatitis; insulin requiring

Adapted from Carmody et al. (153). AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; IUGR, intrauterine growth restriction; OGTT, oral glucose tolerance test; UPD6, uniparental disomy of chromosome 6; 2-h PG, 2-h plasma glucose.

The ADA-European Association for the
Study of Diabetes type 1 diabetes consensus report recommends that regardless of
current age, individuals diagnosed under
6 months of age should have genetic testing (36). Correct diagnosis has critical implications, because 30–50% of people with
KATP-related neonatal diabetes will exhibit
improved blood glucose levels when
treated with high-dose oral sulfonylureas
instead of insulin. Insulin gene (INS) mutations are the second most common
cause of permanent neonatal diabetes,
with insulin therapy being the preferred
treatment strategy.
Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the
Young

MODY is frequently characterized by onset of hyperglycemia at an early age (classically before age 25 years, although
diagnosis may occur at older ages). MODY
is characterized by impaired insulin secretion with minimal or no defects in insulin

action (in the absence of coexistent obesity). It is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern with abnormalities in at least
14 genes on different chromosomes identiﬁed to date (152). The most commonly
reported forms are GCK-MODY (MODY2),
HNF1A-MODY (MODY3), and HNF4AMODY (MODY1).
Correct diagnosis of monogenic forms
of diabetes is critical because people
who have them may be incorrectly diagnosed with type 1 or type 2 diabetes,
leading to suboptimal, even potentially
harmful, treatment plans and delays in
diagnosing other family members (152).
A diagnosis of MODY should be considered in individuals who have atypical diabetes and multiple family members with
diabetes not characteristic of type 1 or
type 2 diabetes (155–162) (Fig. 2.1). In
most cases, the presence of autoantibodies for type 1 diabetes precludes further
testing for monogenic diabetes, but the
presence of autoantibodies in people with

monogenic diabetes has been reported.
Individuals in whom monogenic diabetes
is suspected should have genetic testing.
Genetic screening (i.e., next-generation
sequencing) is increasingly available and
cost-effective (152). Consultation with a
center specializing in diabetes genetics is
recommended to understand the signiﬁcance of genetic mutations and how best
to approach further evaluation, treatment,
and genetic counseling. Genetic counseling is recommended to ensure that affected individuals understand the patterns
of inheritance and the importance of a
correct diagnosis and to address comprehensive cardiovascular risk.
A diagnosis of one of the three most
common forms of MODY, HNF1A-MODY,
GCK-MODY, and HNF4A-MODY, allows for
more cost-effective personalized therapy
(i.e., no therapy for GCK-MODY and sulfonylureas as ﬁrst-line therapy for HNF1AMODY and HNF4A-MODY). See Section 9,
“Pharmacologic Approaches to Glycemic

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

Neonatal diabetes

Gene

S42

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

Treatment,” for further information. Additionally, diagnosis can lead to identiﬁcation of other affected family members
and can indicate potential extrapancreatic
complications in affected individuals.
GESTATIONAL DIABETES
MELLITUS

2.25 In individuals who are planning
pregnancy, screen those with risk factors (Table 2.5) B and consider testing
all individuals of childbearing potential
for undiagnosed prediabetes or diabetes. E
2.26a Before 15 weeks of gestation, test individuals with risk factors (Table 2.5) B and consider testing
all individuals E for undiagnosed diabetes at the ﬁrst prenatal visit using standard diagnostic criteria if not screened
preconception.
2.26b Before 15 weeks of gestation,
screen for abnormal glucose metabolism to identify individuals who are at
higher risk of adverse pregnancy and
neonatal outcomes, are more likely
to need insulin, and are at high risk
of a later gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) diagnosis. B
2.26c Screen for early abnormal glucose metabolism with dysglycemia
using FPG 110–125 mg/dL (6.1–
6.9 mmol/L) or A1C 5.9–6.4% (41–
47 mmol/mol). B
2.27 Screen for GDM at 24–28 weeks
of gestation in pregnant individuals
not previously found to have diabetes or high-risk abnormal glucose metabolism detected earlier in the current
pregnancy. A
2.28 Screen individuals with GDM for
prediabetes or diabetes at 4–12 weeks
postpartum, using the 75-g OGTT and
clinically appropriate nonpregnancy diagnostic criteria. B
2.29 Individuals with a history of GDM
should have lifelong screening for the
development of prediabetes or diabetes every 1–3 years. B

Deﬁnition

For many years, gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) was deﬁned as any degree of
glucose intolerance that was ﬁrst recognized during pregnancy (86), regardless
of the degree of hyperglycemia. This

deﬁnition facilitated a uniform strategy
for detection and classiﬁcation of GDM,
but this deﬁnition has limitations (163).
First, the best evidence reveals that
many cases of GDM represent preexisting hyperglycemia that is detected by
routine screening in pregnancy, as routine screening is not widely performed in
nonpregnant individuals of reproductive
age. The ongoing epidemic of obesity
and diabetes has led to more type 2 diabetes in people of reproductive age, with
an increase in the number of pregnant individuals with undiagnosed type 2 diabetes
in early pregnancy (164–166). Ideally, undiagnosed diabetes should be identiﬁed
preconception in individuals with risk factors or in high-risk populations (167–172),
as they are likely to beneﬁt from preconception care. The preconception care of
people with known preexisting diabetes
results in lower A1C and reduced risk of
birth defects, preterm delivery, perinatal
mortality, small-for-gestational-age birth
weight, and neonatal intensive care unit
admission (173). If individuals are not
screened prior to pregnancy, universal
early screening at <15 weeks of gestation
for undiagnosed diabetes may be considered over selective screening (Table 2.5),
particularly in populations with high prevalence of risk factors and undiagnosed diabetes in people of childbearing age.
Strong racial and ethnic disparities exist in
the prevalence of undiagnosed diabetes.
Therefore, early screening provides an initial step to identify these health disparities so that they can begin to address
them (169–172). Diagnostic criteria for
identifying undiagnosed diabetes in early
pregnancy are the same as those used in
nonpregnant individuals (Table 2.1). Individuals found to have diabetes should
be classiﬁed as having diabetes complicating pregnancy (most often type 2 diabetes, rarely type 1 diabetes or monogenic
diabetes) and managed accordingly.
Early abnormal glucose metabolism,
deﬁned as a fasting glucose threshold of
110 mg/dL (6.1 mmol/L) or an A1C of
5.9% (41 mmol/mol), may identify individuals who are at higher risk of adverse
pregnancy and neonatal outcomes (preeclampsia, macrosomia, shoulder dystocia, and perinatal death), are at high risk
of a later GDM diagnosis, and are more
likely to need insulin treatment (174–176).
An A1C threshold of 5.7% (39 mmol/L) has
not been shown to be associated with adverse perinatal outcomes (177,178).

If early screenings for undiagnosed diabetes or early abnormal glucose metabolism were negative, individuals should be
rescreened for GDM between 24 and 28
weeks of gestation and individuals not
previously screened should be screened
for GDM at the same time point (see
Section 15, “Management of Diabetes in
Pregnancy”). The GDM diagnostic criteria
for the 75-g OGTT from the International
Association of the Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups (IADPSG) and the
GDM screening and diagnostic criteria
with the two-step approach were not
derived from data in the ﬁrst half of
pregnancy and should not be used for
early screening (179). Most randomized
controlled trials of treatment of early abnormal glucose metabolism have been
underpowered for outcomes. One randomized controlled trial performed at 17 centers
administered early screening (mean 15.6 ±
2.5 weeks) for GDM with a 75-g OGTT. Individuals who met World Health Organization
criteria for GDM were randomized to receive early treatment or a repeat OGTT at
24–28 weeks (with deferred treatment if indicated). The ﬁrst primary outcome measure was an adverse neonatal composite
outcome including birth <37 weeks, birth
weight $4.5 kg, birth trauma, neonatal
respiratory distress within 24 h of birth,
phototherapy, stillbirth neonatal death,
or shoulder dystocia. Early GDM treatment resulted in a modest improvement
in the composite adverse neonatal outcome (24.9% early treatment vs. 30.5%
control treatment, relative risk 0.82
[0.68–0.98]), although this was driven primarily by differences in rates of neonatal
respiratory distress between groups that
included neonates requiring $4 h of supplemental oxygen who may not have required a higher level of respiratory care.
There was also a suggestion of more beneﬁt (per prespeciﬁed subgroup analyses)
among individuals who had the OGTT at
<14 weeks and among those with OGTT
glycemic values in higher ranges (180).
Therefore, the beneﬁts of treatment of
early abnormal glucose metabolism remain uncertain. Nutrition counseling and
periodic testing of glucose levels weekly
to identify individuals with high glucose
levels are suggested. Testing frequency
may proceed to daily, and treatment may
be intensiﬁed, if the FPG is predominantly
>110 mg/dL (>6.1 mmol/L) prior to
18 weeks of gestation.

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

Recommendations

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

diabetesjournals.org/care

Table 2.8—Screening for and diagnosis of GDM
One-step strategy
Perform a 75-g OGTT, with plasma glucose measurement when an individual is fasting and at
1 and 2 h, at 24–28 weeks of gestation in individuals not previously diagnosed with diabetes.
The OGTT should be performed in the morning after an overnight fast of at least 8 h.
The diagnosis of GDM is made when any of the following plasma glucose values are met or
exceeded:
 Fasting: 92 mg/dL (5.1 mmol/L)
 1 h: 180 mg/dL (10.0 mmol/L)
 2 h: 153 mg/dL (8.5 mmol/L)
Two-step strategy
Step 1: Perform a 50-g GLT (nonfasting), with plasma glucose measurement at 1 h, at
24–28 weeks of gestation in individuals not previously diagnosed with diabetes.
If the plasma glucose level measured 1 h after the load is $130, 135, or 140 mg/dL (7.2,
7.5, or 7.8 mmol/L, respectively),* proceed to a 100-g OGTT.
Step 2: The 100-g OGTT should be performed when the individual is fasting.
The diagnosis of GDM is made when at least two† of the following four plasma glucose
levels (measured fasting and at 1, 2, and 3 h during OGTT) are met or exceeded
(Carpenter-Coustan criteria [208]):
 Fasting: 95 mg/dL (5.3 mmol/L)
 1 h: 180 mg/dL (10.0 mmol/L)
 2 h: 155 mg/dL (8.6 mmol/L)
 3 h: 140 mg/dL (7.8 mmol/L)
GDM, gestational diabetes mellitus; GLT, glucose load test; OGTT, oral glucose tolerance
test. *American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends any of the
commonly used thresholds of 130, 135, or 140 mg/dL for the 1-h 50-g GLT (204). †ACOG
notes that one elevated value can be used for diagnosis (204).

Different diagnostic criteria will identify
different degrees of maternal hyperglycemia and maternal/fetal risk, leading
experts to debate optimal strategies for
the diagnosis of GDM.

Diagnosis

GDM carries risks for the mother, fetus,
and neonate. The Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy Outcome (HAPO) study
(189), a large-scale multinational cohort
study completed by more than 23,000
pregnant individuals, demonstrated that
risk of adverse maternal, fetal, and neonatal outcomes continuously increased
as a function of maternal glycemia at
24–28 weeks of gestation, even within
ranges previously considered normal for
pregnancy. For most complications, there
was no threshold for risk. These results
have led to careful reconsideration of the
diagnostic criteria for GDM.
GDM diagnosis (Table 2.8) can be accomplished with either of two strategies:
1. The “one-step” 75-g OGTT derived
from the IADPSG criteria, or
2. The older “two-step” approach with a
50-g (nonfasting) screen followed by a
100-g OGTT for those who screen positive based on the work of CarpenterCoustan’s interpretation of the older
O’Sullivan and Mahan (190) criteria.

S43

One-Step Strategy

The IADPSG examined data from the
HAPO study and deﬁned diagnostic cut
points for GDM as the average fasting,
1-h, and 2-h PG values during a 75-g
OGTT in individuals at 24–28 weeks of
gestation, wherein the cut points were
those at which odds for adverse outcomes
reached 1.75 times the estimated odds.
This one-step strategy was anticipated to
signiﬁcantly increase the incidence of
GDM (from 5–6% to 15–20%), primarily
because only one abnormal value, not
two, became sufﬁcient to make the diagnosis (191). Many regional studies have
seen a roughly one- to threefold increase
in GDM cases using the IADPSG criteria
(192). A study of pregnancy OGTTs with
glucose levels blinded to caregivers found
that 11 years after their pregnancies, individuals who would have been diagnosed
with GDM by the one-step approach, as
compared with those without GDM, were
at 3.4-fold higher risk of developing prediabetes and type 2 diabetes and had
children with a higher risk of obesity and

increased body fat, suggesting that the
group identiﬁed as having GDM by the
one-step approach would beneﬁt from
the increased screening for diabetes and
prediabetes after pregnancy (193). The
ADA recommends the IADPSG diagnostic
criteria to optimize gestational outcomes,
because these criteria are the only ones
based on pregnancy outcomes rather
than end points such as prediction of
subsequent maternal diabetes.
Expected beneﬁts of using IADPSG
criteria for offspring are inferred from intervention trials focusing on individuals
with lower levels of hyperglycemia than
those identiﬁed using older GDM diagnostic criteria. Those trials found modest
beneﬁts, including reduced rates of largefor-gestational-age births and preeclampsia (194,195). Of note, 80–90% of participants being treated for mild GDM in
these two randomized controlled trials
could be managed with lifestyle therapy
alone. The OGTT glucose cutoffs in these
two trials overlapped the thresholds recommended by the IADPSG, and in one trial
(195), the 2-h PG threshold (140 mg/dL
[7.8 mmol/L]) was lower than the cutoff
recommended by the IADPSG (153 mg/dL
[8.5 mmol/L]).
No randomized controlled trials of treating versus not treating GDM diagnosed by

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

Both the FPG and A1C are low-cost
tests. An advantage of the A1C test is its
convenience, as it can be added to the
prenatal laboratories and does not require an early-morning fasting appointment. Disadvantages include inaccuracies
in the presence of increased red blood
cell turnover and hemoglobinopathies
(usually reads lower) and higher values
with anemia and reduced red blood cell
turnover (181). A1C is not reliable for
screening for GDM or for preexisting diabetes at 15 weeks of gestation or later
in part from the higher red blood cell
turnover in pregnancy but also from
the unknown diabetes status prior to
pregnancy, which could help distinguish new-onset diabetes from preexisting diabetes.
GDM is often indicative of underlying
b-cell dysfunction (182), which confers
marked increased risk for later development of glucose intolerance and diabetes
in the mother after delivery (183–185).
As effective prevention interventions are
available (186,187), individuals diagnosed
with GDM should receive lifelong screening for prediabetes to allow interventions
to reduce diabetes risk and for type 2 diabetes to allow treatment at the earliest
possible time (188).

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

S44

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

Two-Step Strategy

In 2013, the NIH convened a consensus
development conference to consider diagnostic criteria for diagnosing GDM (203).
The 15-member panel had representatives
from obstetrics and gynecology, maternal-fetal medicine, pediatrics, diabetes
research, biostatistics, and other related
ﬁelds. The panel recommended continuing

a two-step approach to screening that
used a 1-h 50-g glucose loading test (GLT)
followed by a 3-h 100-g OGTT for those
who screened positive. The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
(ACOG) recommends any of the commonly used thresholds of 130, 135, or
140 mg/dL for the 1-h 50-g GLT (204). A
2021 U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
systematic review concluded that onestep versus two-step screening is associated with increased likelihood of GDM
(11.5% vs. 4.9%) but without improved
health outcomes (205). The use of A1C at
24–28 weeks of gestation as a screening
test for GDM does not function as well as
the GLT (206).
Importantly, the NIH panel noted the
lack of clinical trial data demonstrating
the beneﬁts of the one-step strategy and
the potential negative consequences of
identifying a large group of individuals
with GDM, including medicalization of
pregnancy with increased health care utilization and costs. Moreover, screening
with a 50-g GLT does not require fasting
and therefore is easier to accomplish for
many individuals. Treatment of higherthreshold maternal hyperglycemia, as identiﬁed by the two-step approach, reduces
rates of neonatal macrosomia, large-forgestational-age births (207), and shoulder
dystocia without increasing small-forgestational-age births. ACOG currently
supports the two-step approach but
notes that one elevated value, as opposed to two, may be used for the diagnosis of GDM (204). If this approach is
implemented, the incidence of GDM
will likely increase markedly. ACOG recommends either of two sets of diagnostic thresholds for the 3-h 100-g OGTT
Carpenter-Coustan or National Diabetes
Data Group (208,209). Each is based on
different mathematical conversions of
the original recommended thresholds by
O’Sullivan and Mahan (190), which used
whole blood and nonenzymatic methods
for glucose determination. A secondary
analysis of data from a randomized clinical
trial of identiﬁcation and treatment of mild
GDM (210) demonstrated that treatment
was similarly beneﬁcial in people meeting
only the lower thresholds per CarpenterCoustan (208) and in those meeting only
the higher thresholds per National Diabetes
Data Group (209). If the two-step approach is used, it would appear advantageous to use the Carpenter-Coustan

lower diagnostic thresholds, as shown
in step 2 in Table 2.8.
Future Considerations

Data exist to support each strategy, as
demonstrated by conﬂicting recommendations by expert groups. A systematic review of economic evaluations of GDM
screening found that the one-step method
identiﬁed more cases of GDM and was
more likely to be cost-effective than the
two-step method (211). The decision of
which strategy to implement must therefore be made based on the relative values placed on factors that have yet to
be measured (e.g., willingness to change
practice based on correlation studies
rather than intervention trial results,
available infrastructure, and importance
of cost considerations).
The IADPSG criteria (one-step strategy)
have been adopted internationally as the
preferred approach. Data that compare
population-wide outcomes with one-step
versus two-step approaches have been
inconsistent to date (196,212–214). Pregnancies complicated by GDM per the
IADPSG criteria, but not recognized as
such, have outcomes comparable to pregnancies with diagnosed GDM by the more
stringent two-step criteria (215,216). There
remains strong consensus that establishing
a uniform approach to diagnosing GDM
will beneﬁt people with GDM, caregivers,
and policymakers. Longer-term outcome
studies are currently underway.
References
1. Sacks DB, Arnold M, Bakris GL, et al. Guidelines
and recommendations for laboratory analysis
in the diagnosis and management of diabetes
mellitus. Diabetes Care 2023;46:e151–e199
2. American Diabetes Association. Diagnosis and
classiﬁcation of diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care
2014;37(Suppl 1):S81–S90
3. International Expert Committee. International
Expert Committee report on the role of the A1C
assay in the diagnosis of diabetes. Diabetes Care
2009;32:1327–1334
4. Meijnikman AS, De Block CEM, Dirinck E, et al.
Not performing an OGTT results in signiﬁcant
underdiagnosis of (pre)diabetes in a high risk
adult Caucasian population. Int J Obes 2017;41:
1615–1620
5. Knowler WC, Barrett-Connor E, Fowler SE,
et al. Reduction in the incidence of type 2
diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin.
N Engl J Med 2002;346:393–403
6. Tuomilehto J, Lindstr€
om J, Eriksson JG, et al.;
Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study Group.
Prevention of type 2 diabetes mellitus by changes
in lifestyle among subjects with impaired glucose
tolerance. N Engl J Med 2001;344:1343–1350

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

different criteria have been published to
date. However, a randomized trial of testing for GDM at 24–28 weeks of gestation
by the one-step method using IADPSG
criteria versus the two-step method by
Carpenter-Coustan criteria identiﬁed twice
as many individuals with GDM using the
one-step method. Despite treating more
individuals for GDM using the one-step
method, there was no difference in
pregnancy and perinatal complications
(196), though concerns were raised about
sample size estimates and unanticipated
suboptimal engagement with the screening and treatment protocol. For example,
in the two-step group, 165 participants
not counted as having GDM were treated
for isolated elevated FPG >95 mg/dL
(>5.3 mmol/L) (197).
The one-step method identiﬁes longterm risks of maternal prediabetes and diabetes as well as offspring glucose intolerance and adiposity. Post hoc GDM in
individuals diagnosed with this method in
the HAPO cohort was associated with
higher prevalence of IGT; higher 30-min,
1-h, and 2-h glucose levels during the
OGTT; and reduced insulin sensitivity and
oral disposition index in their offspring at
10–14 years of age compared with offspring of mothers without GDM. Associations of mother’s fasting, 1-h, and 2-h
values on the 75-g OGTT were continuous
with a comprehensive panel of offspring
metabolic outcomes (198,199). HAPO
Follow-up Study (HAPO FUS) data demonstrate that neonatal adiposity and fetal
hyperinsulinemia (cord C-peptide), both
higher across the continuum of maternal
hyperglycemia, are mediators of childhood body fat (200).
Data are lacking on how the treatment
of mother’s hyperglycemia in pregnancy
affects her offspring’s risk for obesity,
diabetes, and other metabolic disorders
(201,202). Additional well-designed clinical studies are needed to determine the
optimal intensity of monitoring and treatment of individuals with GDM diagnosed
by the one-step strategy.

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

diabetesjournals.org/care

Prevention Program. Diabetes Care 2007;30:
2453–2457
24. Saaddine JB, Fagot-Campagna A, Rolka D,
et al. Distribution of HbA(1c) levels for children
and young adults in the U.S.: Third National Health
and Nutrition Examination Survey. Diabetes Care
2002;25:1326–1330
25. Selvin E, Steffes MW, Ballantyne CM,
Hoogeveen RC, Coresh J, Brancati FL. Racial
differences in glycemic markers: a cross-sectional
analysis of community-based data. Ann Intern
Med 2011;154:303–309
26. Landry LG, Ali N, Williams DR, Rehm HL,
Bonham VL. Lack of diversity in genomic databases
is a barrier to translating precision medicine
research into practice. Health Aff (Millwood)
2018;37:780–785
27. Wojcik GL, Graff M, Nishimura KK, et al.
Genetic analyses of diverse populations improves
discovery for complex traits. Nature 2019;570:
514–518
28. Selvin E, Rawlings AM, Bergenstal RM,
Coresh J, Brancati FL. No racial differences in the
association of glycated hemoglobin with kidney
disease and cardiovascular outcomes. Diabetes
Care 2013;36:2995–3001
29. Selvin E, Wang D, Matsushita K, Grams ME,
Coresh J. Prognostic implications of single-sample
conﬁrmatory testing for undiagnosed diabetes: a
prospective cohort study. Ann Intern Med 2018;
169:156–164
30. Umpierrez GE, Davis GM, ElSayed NA, et al.
Hyperglycemic crises in adults with diabetes: a
consensus report. Diabetes Care 2024;47:1257–
1275
31. Alonso GT, Coakley A, Pyle L, Manseau K,
Thomas S, Rewers A. Diabetic ketoacidosis at
diagnosis of type 1 diabetes in Colorado children,
2010-2017. Diabetes Care 2020;43:117–121
32. Jensen ET, Stafford JM, Saydah S, et al.
Increase in prevalence of diabetic ketoacidosis at
diagnosis among youth with type 1 diabetes: the
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study. Diabetes
Care 2021;44:1573–1578
33. Humphreys A, Bravis V, Kaur A, et al. Individual
and diabetes presentation characteristics associated
with partial remission status in children and adults
evaluated up to 12months following diagnosis of
type 1 diabetes: an ADDRESS-2 (After Diagnosis
Diabetes Research Support System-2) study
analysis. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2019;155:107789
34. Thomas NJ, Lynam AL, Hill AV, et al. Type 1
diabetes deﬁned by severe insulin deﬁciency
occurs after 30 years of age and is commonly
treated as type 2 diabetes. Diabetologia 2019;
62:1167–1172
35. Hope SV, Wienand-Barnett S, Shepherd M,
et al. Practical Classiﬁcation Guidelines for
Diabetes in patients treated with insulin: a crosssectional study of the accuracy of diabetes
diagnosis. Br J Gen Pract 2016;66:e315–e322
36. Holt RIG, DeVries JH, Hess-Fischl A, et al. The
management of type 1 diabetes in adults. A
consensus report by the American Diabetes
Association (ADA) and the European Association
for the Study of Diabetes (EASD). Diabetes Care
2021;44:2589–2625
37. Zhong VW, Juhaeri J, Mayer-Davis EJ. Trends
in hospital admission for diabetic ketoacidosis
in adults with type 1 and type 2 diabetes in
England, 1998-2013: a retrospective cohort study.
Diabetes Care 2018;41:1870–1877

38. Skyler JS, Bakris GL, Bonifacio E, et al.
Differentiation of diabetes by pathophysiology,
natural history, and prognosis. Diabetes 2017;66:
241–255
39. Williams DM, Jones H, Stephens JW.
Personalized type 2 diabetes management: an
update on recent advances and recommendations.
Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes 2022;15:281–295
40. Ziegler AG, Rewers M, Simell O, et al.
Seroconversion to multiple islet autoantibodies
and risk of progression to diabetes in children.
JAMA 2013;309:2473–2479
41. Ziegler A-G, Bonifacio E, BABYDIAB-BABYDIET
Study Group. Age-related islet autoantibody
incidence in offspring of patients with type 1
diabetes. Diabetologia 2012;55:1937–1943
42. Parikka V, N€ant€
o-Salonen K, Saarinen M,
et al. Early seroconversion and rapidly increasing
autoantibody concentrations predict prepubertal
manifestation of type 1 diabetes in children at
genetic risk. Diabetologia 2012;55:1926–1936
43. Krischer JP, Lynch KF, Schatz DA, et al.;
TEDDY Study Group. The 6 year incidence of
diabetes-associated autoantibodies in genetically
at-risk children: the TEDDY study. Diabetologia
2015;58:980–987
44. Bogun MM, Bundy BN, Goland RS, Greenbaum
CJ. C-peptide levels in subjects followed longitudinally
before and after type 1 diabetes diagnosis in TrialNet.
Diabetes Care 2020;43:1836–1842
45. Insel RA, Dunne JL, Atkinson MA, et al.
Staging presymptomatic type 1 diabetes: a
scientiﬁc statement of JDRF, the Endocrine
Society, and the American Diabetes Association.
Diabetes Care 2015;38:1964–1974
46. Zhu Y, Qian L, Liu Q, et al. Glutamic acid
decarboxylase autoantibody detection by electrochemiluminescence assay identiﬁes latent
autoimmune diabetes in adults with poor islet
function. Diabetes Metab J 2020;44:260–266
47. Lynam A, McDonald T, Hill A, et al.
Development and validation of multivariable
clinical diagnostic models to identify type 1
diabetes requiring rapid insulin therapy in adults
aged 18-50 years. BMJ Open 2019;9:e031586
48. Jones AG, McDonald TJ, Shields BM,
Hagopian W, Hattersley AT. Latent autoimmune
diabetes of adults (LADA) is likely to represent a
mixed population of autoimmune (type 1) and
nonautoimmune (type 2) diabetes. Diabetes Care
2021;44:1243–1251
49. Lynam AL, Dennis JM, Owen KR, et al.
Logistic regression has similar performance to
optimised machine learning algorithms in a
clinical setting: application to the discrimination
between type 1 and type 2 diabetes in young
adults. Diagn Progn Res 2020;4:6
50. Chung WK, Erion K, Florez JC, et al. Precision
medicine in diabetes: a consensus report from
the American Diabetes Association (ADA) and the
European Association for the Study of Diabetes
(EASD). Diabetes Care 2020;43:1617–1635
51. Gale EAM. Declassifying diabetes. Diabetologia
2006;49:1989–1995
52. Schwartz SS, Epstein S, Corkey BE, Grant
SFA, Gavin JR, Aguilar RB. The time is right for a
new classiﬁcation system for diabetes: rationale
and implications of the b-cell-centric classiﬁcation
schema. Diabetes Care 2016;39:179–186
53. Steck AK, Vehik K, Bonifacio E, et al.;
TEDDY Study Group. Predictors of progression
from the appearance of islet autoantibodies to

S45

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

7. Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
HbA1c as a predictor of diabetes and as an outcome
in the Diabetes Prevention Program: a randomized
clinical trial. Diabetes Care 2015;38:51–58
8. Echouffo-Tcheugui JB, Selvin E. Prediabetes
and what it means: the epidemiological evidence.
Annu Rev Public Health 2021;42:59–77
9. Chadha C, Pittas AG, Lary CW, et al.; D2d
Research Group. Reproducibility of a prediabetes
classiﬁcation in a contemporary population.
Metabol Open 2020;6:100031
10. Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and
Classiﬁcation of Diabetes Mellitus. Report of the
Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and Classiﬁcation
of Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes Care 1997;20:1183–
1197
11. Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and
Classiﬁcation of Diabetes Mellitus. Report of
the Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and
Classiﬁcation of Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes Care
2003;26(Suppl 1):S5–S20
12. Klein KR, Walker CP, McFerren AL, Huffman
H, Frohlich F, Buse JB. Carbohydrate intake prior
to oral glucose tolerance testing. J Endocr Soc
2021;5:bvab049
13. Conn JW. Interpretation of the glucose
tolerance test. The necessity of a standard
preparatory diet. Am J Med Sci 1940;199:
555–563
14. Wilkerson HL, Butler FK, Francis JO. The
effect of prior carbohydrate intake on the oral
glucose tolerance test. Diabetes 1960;9:386–391
15. Lenters-Westra E, Slingerland RJ. Six of eight
hemoglobin A1c point-of-care instruments do not
meet the general accepted analytical performance
criteria. Clin Chem 2010;56:44–52
16. Hirst JA, McLellan JH, Price CP, et al.
Performance of point-of-care HbA1c test devices:
implications for use in clinical practice—a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Chem Lab
Med 2017;55:167–180
17. Nathan DM, Grifﬁn A, Perez FM, Basque E,
Do L, Steiner B. Accuracy of a point-of-care
hemoglobin A1c assay. J Diabetes Sci Technol
2019;13:1149–1153
18. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. CLIA
Brochures. Accessed 5 August 2024. Available from
https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/
Legislation/CLIA/CLIA_Brochures
19. Eckhardt BJ, Holzman RS, Kwan CK,
Baghdadi J, Aberg JA. Glycated hemoglobin A(1c)
as screening for diabetes mellitus in HIV-infected
individuals. AIDS Patient Care STDS 2012;26:
197–201
20. Kim PS, Woods C, Georgoff P, et al. A1C
underestimates glycemia in HIV infection. Diabetes
Care 2009;32:1591–1593
21. Wheeler E, Leong A, Liu C-T, et al.; Lifelines
Cohort Study. Impact of common genetic
determinants of hemoglobin A1c on type 2
diabetes risk and diagnosis in ancestrally diverse
populations: a transethnic genome-wide metaanalysis. PLoS Med 2017;14:e1002383
22. Bergenstal RM, Gal RL, Connor CG, et al.;
T1D Exchange Racial Differences Study Group.
Racial differences in the relationship of glucose
concentrations and hemoglobin A1c levels. Ann
Intern Med 2017;167:95–102
23. Herman WH, Ma Y, Uwaifo G, et al.; Diabetes
Prevention Program Research Group. Differences
in A1C by race and ethnicity among patients with
impaired glucose tolerance in the Diabetes

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

S46

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

modelling study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
2022;10:741–760
71. McQueen RB, Geno Rasmussen C, Waugh K,
et al. Cost and cost-effectiveness of large-scale
screening for type 1 diabetes in Colorado. Diabetes Care 2020;43:1496–1503
72. Ziegler A-G, Kick K, Bonifacio E, et al.; Fr1da
Study Group. Yield of a public health screening
of children for islet autoantibodies in Bavaria,
Germany. JAMA 2020;323:339–351
73. Hagopian WA, Erlich H, Lernmark A, et al.;
TEDDY Study Group. The Environmental Determinants of Diabetes in the Young (TEDDY):
genetic criteria and international diabetes risk
screening of 421 000 infants. Pediatr Diabetes
2011;12:733–743
74. Orban T, Sosenko JM, Cuthbertson D, et al.;
Diabetes Prevention Trial-Type 1 Study Group.
Pancreatic islet autoantibodies as predictors of
type 1 diabetes in the Diabetes Prevention TrialType 1. Diabetes Care 2009;32:2269–2274
75. Sosenko JM, Skyler JS, Palmer JP, et al.;
Diabetes Prevention Trial-Type 1 Study Group.
The prediction of type 1 diabetes by multiple
autoantibody levels and their incorporation into
an autoantibody risk score in relatives of type 1
diabetic patients. Diabetes Care 2013;36:2615–
2620
76. Jacobsen LM, Larsson HE, Tamura RN, et al.;
TEDDY Study Group. Predicting progression to
type 1 diabetes from ages 3 to 6 in islet
autoantibody positive TEDDY children. Pediatr
Diabetes 2019;20:263–270
77. Barker JM, Goehrig SH, Barriga K, et al.;
DAISY Study. Clinical characteristics of children
diagnosed with type 1 diabetes through intensive
screening and follow-up. Diabetes Care 2004;27:
1399–1404
78. Elding Larsson H, Vehik K, Gesualdo P, et al.;
TEDDY Study Group. Children followed in the
TEDDY study are diagnosed with type 1 diabetes
at an early stage of disease. Pediatr Diabetes
2014;15:118–126
79. Kimpim€aki T, Kulmala P, Savola K, et al. Natural
history of beta-cell autoimmunity in young children
with increased genetic susceptibility to type 1
diabetes recruited from the general population. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2002;87:4572–4579
80. Vehik K, Lynch KF, Schatz DA, et al.; TEDDY
Study Group. Reversion of b-cell autoimmunity
changes risk of type 1 diabetes: TEDDY study.
Diabetes Care 2016;39:1535–1542
81. Sharp SA, Rich SS, Wood AR, et al.
Development and standardization of an improved
type 1 diabetes genetic risk score for use in
newborn screening and incident diagnosis.
Diabetes Care 2019;42:200–207
82. Luckett AM, Weedon MN, Hawkes G, Leslie
RD, Oram RA, Grant SFA. Utility of genetic risk
scores in type 1 diabetes. Diabetologia 2023;66:
1589–1600
83. Bosi E, Catassi C. Screening type 1 diabetes
and celiac disease by law. Lancet Diabetes
Endocrinol 2024;12:12–14
84. Herold KC, Bundy BN, Long SA, et al.; Type 1
Diabetes TrialNet Study Group. An anti-CD3
antibody, teplizumab, in relatives at risk for type 1
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2019;381:603–613
85. Selvin E. Are there clinical implications of
racial differences in HbA1c? A difference, to be a
difference, must make a difference. Diabetes
Care 2016;39:1462–1467

86. Zhang X, Gregg EW, Williamson DF, et al. A1C
level and future risk of diabetes: a systematic
review. Diabetes Care 2010;33:1665–1673
87. Selvin E, Steffes MW, Zhu H, et al. Glycated
hemoglobin, diabetes, and cardiovascular risk in
nondiabetic adults. N Engl J Med 2010;362:
800–811
88. Ackermann RT, Cheng YJ, Williamson DF,
Gregg EW. Identifying adults at high risk for diabetes
and cardiovascular disease using hemoglobin
A1c National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey 2005-2006. Am J Prev Med 2011;40:
11–17
89. Umpierrez G, Korytkowski M. Diabetic
emergencies—ketoacidosis, hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state and hypoglycaemia. Nat Rev
Endocrinol 2016;12:222–232
90. Fadini GP, Bonora BM, Avogaro A. SGLT2
inhibitors and diabetic ketoacidosis: data from
the FDA Adverse Event Reporting System. Diabetologia 2017;60:1385–1389
91. Taheri S, Zaghloul H, Chagoury O, et al. Effect
of intensive lifestyle intervention on bodyweight
and glycaemia in early type 2 diabetes (DIADEM-I):
an open-label, parallel-group, randomised controlled trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2020;8:
477–489
92. Lean MEJ, Leslie WS, Barnes AC, et al. Durability
of a primary care-led weight-management intervention for remission of type 2 diabetes: 2-year
results of the DiRECT open-label, cluster-randomised
trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2019;7:344–355
93. Conte C, Lapeyre-Mestre M, Hanaire H, Ritz
P. Diabetes remission and relapse after bariatric
surgery: a nationwide population-based study.
Obes Surg 2020;30:4810–4820
94. Cresci B, Cosentino C, Monami M, Mannucci
E. Metabolic surgery for the treatment of type 2
diabetes: a network meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Diabetes Obes Metab 2020;22:
1378–1387
95. U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. National Diabetes Statistics Report.
Estimates of Diabetes and Its Burden in the
United States. Accessed 11 September 2024.
Available from https://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/
php/data-research/index.html
96. International Diabetes Federation. IDF Diabetes
Atlas, 10th edition. Brussels, Belgium, International
Diabetes Federation, 2021. Accessed 5 August 2024.
Available from https://www.diabetesatlas.org/atlas/
tenth-edition/
97. Mei Z, Wang F, Bhosle A, et al. Strain-speciﬁc
gut microbial signatures in type 2 diabetes
identiﬁed in a cross-cohort analysis of 8,117
metagenomes. Nat Med 2024;30:2265–2276
98. Bardenheier BH, Wu W-C, Zullo AR,
Gravenstein S, Gregg EW. Progression to diabetes
by baseline glycemic status among middle-aged
and older adults in the United States, 2006-2014.
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2021;174:108726
99. Sussman JB, Kent DM, Nelson JP, Hayward
RA. Improving diabetes prevention with beneﬁt
based tailored treatment: risk based reanalysis of
Diabetes Prevention Program. BMJ 2015;350:
h454
100. Palladino R, Tabak AG, Khunti K, et al.
Association between pre-diabetes and microvascular and macrovascular disease in newly
diagnosed type 2 diabetes. BMJ Open Diabetes
Res Care 2020;8:e001061

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

early childhood diabetes: The Environmental
Determinants of Diabetes in the Young (TEDDY).
Diabetes Care 2015;38:808–813
54. McKeigue PM, Spiliopoulou A, McGurnaghan
S, et al. Persistent C-peptide secretion in type 1
diabetes and its relationship to the genetic
architecture of diabetes. BMC Med 2019;17:165
55. Sosenko JM, Palmer JP, Rafkin-Mervis L,
et al.; Diabetes Prevention Trial-Type 1 Study
Group. Incident dysglycemia and progression to
type 1 diabetes among participants in the Diabetes
Prevention Trial-Type 1. Diabetes Care 2009;32:
1603–1607
56. Krischer JP; Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet Study
Group. The use of intermediate endpoints in the
design of type 1 diabetes prevention trials.
Diabetologia 2013;56:1919–1924
57. Phillip M, Achenbach P, Addala A, et al.
Consensus guidance for monitoring individuals
with islet autoantibody–positive pre-stage 3 type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2024;47:1276–1298
58. Greenbaum CJ, Beam CA, Boulware D, et al.;
Type 1 Diabetes TrialNet Study Group. Fall in Cpeptide during ﬁrst 2 years from diagnosis:
evidence of at least two distinct phases from
composite type 1 diabetes TrialNet data. Diabetes
2012;61:2066–2073
59. Mishra R, Hodge KM, Cousminer DL, Leslie
RD, Grant SFA. A global perspective of latent
autoimmune diabetes in adults. Trends Endocrinol
Metab 2018;29:638–650
60. Buzzetti R, Zampetti S, Maddaloni E. Adultonset autoimmune diabetes: current knowledge
and implications for management. Nat Rev
Endocrinol 2017;13:674–686
61. Ben-Skowronek I. IPEX syndrome: genetics
and treatment options. Genes (Basel) 2021;12:323
62. Frommer L, Kahaly GJ. Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2019;
104:4769–4782
63. Smith CJ, Almodallal Y, Jatoi A. Rare adverse
events with programmed death-1 and programmed
death-1 ligand inhibitors: justiﬁcation and rationale
for a systematic review. Curr Oncol Rep 2021;23:86
64. Zhao Z, Wang X, Bao X-Q, Ning J, Shang M,
Zhang D. Autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome
induced by immune checkpoint inhibitors: a
systematic review. Cancer Immunol Immunother
2021;70:1527–1540
65. Chen X, Afﬁnati AH, Lee Y, et al. Immune
checkpoint inhibitors and risk of type 1 diabetes.
Diabetes Care 2022;45:1170–1176
66. Stamatouli AM, Quandt Z, Perdigoto AL, et al.
Collateral damage: insulin-dependent diabetes
induced with checkpoint inhibitors. Diabetes 2018;
67:1471–1480
67. Wu L, Tsang V, Menzies AM, et al. Risk factors
and characteristics of checkpoint inhibitor–
associated autoimmune diabetes mellitus (CIADM):
a systematic review and delineation from type 1
diabetes. Diabetes Care 2023;46:1292–1299
68. Wang Y, Guo H,Wang G, Zhai J, Du B. COVID-19
as a trigger for type 1 diabetes. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2023;108:2176–2183
69. CoviDIAB Registry Project. CoviDIAB Registry.
Accessed 5 August 2024. Available from https://
covidiab.e-dendrite.com/
70. Gregory GA, Robinson TIG, Linklater SE, et al.;
International Diabetes Federation Diabetes Atlas
Type 1 Diabetes in Adults Special Interest Group.
Global incidence, prevalence, and mortality of type 1
diabetes in 2021 with projection to 2040: a

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

diabetesjournals.org/care

116. Ewald N, Bretzel RG. Diabetes mellitus
secondary to pancreatic diseases (type 3c)–are
we neglecting an important disease? Eur J Intern
Med 2013;24:203–206
117. Hines OJ, Pandol SJ. Management of
chronic pancreatitis. BMJ 2024;384:e070920
118. Hardt PD, Brendel MD, Kloer HU, Bretzel
RG. Is pancreatic diabetes (type 3c diabetes)
underdiagnosed and misdiagnosed? Diabetes Care
2008;31(Suppl 2):S165–S169
119. Woodmansey C, McGovern AP, McCullough
KA, et al. Incidence, demographics, and clinical
characteristics of diabetes of the exocrine pancreas
(type 3c): a retrospective cohort study. Diabetes
Care 2017;40:1486–1493
120. Makuc J. Management of pancreatogenic
diabetes: challenges and solutions. Diabetes
Metab Syndr Obes 2016;9:311–315
121. Andersen DK, Korc M, Petersen GM, et al.
Diabetes, pancreatogenic diabetes, and pancreatic
cancer. Diabetes 2017;66:1103–1110
122. Petrov MS, Basina M. Diagnosis of endocrine
disease: diagnosing and classifying diabetes in
diseases of the exocrine pancreas. Eur J Endocrinol
2021;184:R151–R163
123. Bellin MD, Gelrud A, Arreaza-Rubin G,
et al. Total pancreatectomy with islet autotransplantation: summary of an NIDDK workshop.
Ann Surg 2015;261:21–29
124. Anazawa T, Okajima H, Masui T, Uemoto S.
Current state and future evolution of pancreatic
islet transplantation. Ann Gastroenterol Surg
2019;3:34–42
125. Quartuccio M, Hall E, Singh V, et al.
Glycemic predictors of insulin independence
after total pancreatectomy with islet autotransplantation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2017;102:
801–809
126. Putman MS, Norris AW, Hull RL, et al. Cystic
ﬁbrosis-related diabetes workshop: research
priorities spanning disease pathophysiology,
diagnosis, and outcomes. Diabetes Care 2023;46:
1112–1123
127. Ode KL, Ballman M, Battezzati A, et al.
ISPAD Clinical Practice Consensus Guidelines
2022: management of cystic ﬁbrosis-related
diabetes in children and adolescents. Pediatr
Diabetes 2022;23:1212–1228
128. Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Patient Registry
2022 Annual Data Report. Bethesda, MD, Cystic
Fibrosis Foundation, 2022. Accessed 5 August
2024. Available from https://www.cff.org/media/
31216/download
129. Gilmour JA. Response to the letter to the
editor from Dr. Boudreau et al, “Validation of a
stepwise approach using glycated hemoglobin
levels to reduce the number of required oral
glucose tolerance tests to screen for cystic
ﬁbrosis-related diabetes in adults.” Can J Diabetes
2019;43:163
130. Gilmour JA, Sykes J, Etchells E, Tullis E.
Cystic ﬁbrosis-related diabetes screening in
adults: a gap analysis and evaluation of accuracy
of glycated hemoglobin levels. Can J Diabetes
2019;43:13–18
131. Darukhanavala A, Van Dessel F, Ho J,
Hansen M, Kremer T, Alfego D. Use of hemoglobin A1c to identify dysglycemia in cystic
ﬁbrosis. PLoS One 2021;16:e0250036
132. Franck Thompson E, Watson D, Benoit CM,
Landvik S, McNamara J. The association of
pediatric cystic ﬁbrosis-related diabetes screening

on clinical outcomes by center: a CF patient
registry study. J Cyst Fibros 2020;19:316–320
133. Olesen HV, Drevinek P, Gulmans VA, et al.;
ECFSPR Steering Group. Cystic ﬁbrosis related
diabetes in Europe: prevalence, risk factors and
outcome. J Cyst Fibros 2020;19:321–327
134. Mainguy C, Bellon G, Delaup V, et al.
Sensitivity and speciﬁcity of different methods
for cystic ﬁbrosis-related diabetes screening: is
the oral glucose tolerance test still the standard?
J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab 2017;30:27–35
135. Moran A, Pekow P, Grover P, et al.; Cystic
Fibrosis Related Diabetes Therapy Study Group.
Insulin therapy to improve BMI in cystic ﬁbrosisrelated diabetes without fasting hyperglycemia:
results of the cystic ﬁbrosis related diabetes
therapy trial. Diabetes Care 2009;32:1783–1788
136. Moran A, Brunzell C, Cohen RC, et al.;
CFRD Guidelines Committee. Clinical care
guidelines for cystic ﬁbrosis-related diabetes: a
position statement of the American Diabetes
Association and a clinical practice guideline of
the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, endorsed by the
Pediatric Endocrine Society. Diabetes Care 2010;
33:2697–2708
137. Shivaswamy V, Boerner B, Larsen J. Posttransplant diabetes mellitus: causes, treatment,
and impact on outcomes. Endocr Rev 2016;37:
37–61
138. Sharif A, Hecking M, de Vries APJ, et al.
Proceedings from an international consensus
meeting on posttransplantation diabetes mellitus:
recommendations and future directions. Am J
Transplant 2014;14:1992–2000
139. Hecking M, Werzowa J, Haidinger M,
et al.; European-New-Onset Diabetes After
Trans-plantation Working Group. Novel views
on new-onset diabetes after transplantation:
development, prevention and treatment. Nephrol
Dial Transplant 2013;28:550–566
140. Montero N, Oliveras L, Soler MJ, Cruzado
JM. Management of post-transplant diabetes
mellitus: an opportunity for novel therapeutics.
Clin Kidney J 2022;15:5–13
141. Ramirez SC, Maaske J, Kim Y, et al. The
association between glycemic control and clinical
outcomes after kidney transplantation. Endocr
Pract 2014;20:894–900
142. Thomas MC, Moran J, Mathew TH, Russ GR,
Rao MM. Early peri-operative hyperglycaemia
and renal allograft rejection in patients without
diabetes. BMC Nephrol 2000;1:1
143. Chakkera HA, Weil EJ, Castro J, et al.
Hyperglycemia during the immediate period
after kidney transplantation. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2009;4:853–859
144. Wallia A, Illuri V, Molitch ME. Diabetes care
after transplant: deﬁnitions, risk factors, and
clinical management. Med Clin North Am 2016;
100:535–550
145. Kim HD, Chang J-Y, Chung BH, et al. Effect
of everolimus with low-dose tacrolimus on
development of new-onset diabetes after transplantation and allograft function in kidney transplantation: a multicenter, open-label, randomized
trial. Ann Transplant 2021;26:e927984
146. Cheng C-Y, Chen C-H, Wu M-F, et al. Risk
factors in and long-term survival of patients with
post-transplantation diabetes mellitus: a retrospective cohort study. Int J Environ Res Public
Health 2020;17:4581

S47

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

101. Perreault L, Pan Q, Aroda VR, et al.;
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
Exploring residual risk for diabetes and microvascular disease in the Diabetes Prevention
Program Outcomes Study (DPPOS). Diabet Med
2017;34:1747–1755
102. Nathan DM, Bennett PH, Crandall JP, et al.;
DPP Research Group. Does diabetes prevention
translate into reduced long-term vascular complications of diabetes? Diabetologia 2019;62:
1319–1328
103. Chung S, Azar KMJ, Baek M, Lauderdale DS,
Palaniappan LP. Reconsidering the age thresholds
for type II diabetes screening in the U.S. Am J
Prev Med 2014;47:375–381
104. Mansi IA, Sumithran P, Kinaan M. Risk of
diabetes with statins. BMJ 2023;381:e071727
105. American Diabetes Association, American
Psychiatric Association, American Association of
Clinical Endocrinologists, North American Association for the Study of Obesity. Consensus
development conference on antipsychotic drugs
and obesity and diabetes. Diabetes Care 2004;
27:596–601
106. Schambelan M, Benson CA, Carr A, et al.;
International AIDS Society-USA. Management
of metabolic complications associated with
anti-retroviral therapy for HIV-1 infection:
recommendations of an International AIDS
Society–USA panel. J Acquir Immune Deﬁc
Syndr 2002;31:257–275
107. Monroe AK, Glesby MJ, Brown TT. Diagnosing and managing diabetes in HIV-infected
patients: current concepts. Clin Infect Dis 2015;
60:453–462
108. Wohl DA, McComsey G, Tebas P, et al.
Current concepts in the diagnosis and management of metabolic complications of HIV
infection and its therapy. Clin Infect Dis 2006;43:
645–653
109. Johnson SL, Tabaei BP, Herman WH. The
efﬁcacy and cost of alternative strategies for
systematic screening for type 2 diabetes in the
U.S. population 45-74 years of age. Diabetes Care
2005;28:307–311
110. Tabaei BP, Burke R, Constance A, et al.
Community-based screening for diabetes in
Michigan. Diabetes Care 2003;26:668–670
111. Lalla E, Cheng B, Kunzel C, Burkett S,
Lamster IB. Dental ﬁndings and identiﬁcation of
undiagnosed hyperglycemia. J Dent Res 2013;92:
888–892
112. Herman WH, Taylor GW, Jacobson JJ, Burke
R, Brown MB. Screening for prediabetes and
type 2 diabetes in dental ofﬁces. J Public Health
Dent 2015;75:175–182
113. Cowie CC, Rust KF, Byrd-Holt DD, et al.
Prevalence of diabetes and high risk for diabetes
using A1C criteria in the U.S. population in 19882006. Diabetes Care 2010;33:562–568
114. Arslanian S, Bacha F, Grey M, Marcus MD,
White NH, Zeitler P. Evaluation and management
of youth-onset type 2 diabetes: a position
statement by the American Diabetes Association.
Diabetes Care 2018;41:2648–2668
115. Wagenknecht LE, Lawrence JM, Isom S,
et al.; SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study. Trends
in incidence of youth-onset type 1 and type 2
diabetes in the USA, 2002-18: results from the
population-based SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth
study. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 2023;11:242–250

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

S48

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

162. Exeter Diabetes. MODY Probability Calculator.
Accessed 5 August 2024. Available from https://
www.diabetesgenes.org/exeter-diabetes-app/
ModyCalculator
163. Huvinen E, Koivusalo SB, Meinil€a J, et al.
Effects of a lifestyle intervention during pregnancy
and ﬁrst postpartum year: ﬁndings from the
RADIEL study. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2018;103:
1669–1677
164. Feig DS, Hwee J, Shah BR, Booth GL,
Bierman AS, Lipscombe LL. Trends in incidence of
diabetes in pregnancy and serious perinatal
outcomes: a large, population-based study in
Ontario, Canada, 1996-2010. Diabetes Care 2014;
37:1590–1596
165. Peng TY, Ehrlich SF, Crites Y, et al. Trends
and racial and ethnic disparities in the prevalence
of pregestational type 1 and type 2 diabetes in
Northern California: 1996-2014. Am J Obstet
Gynecol 2017;216:177.e171–177.e178
166. Jovanovic L, Liang Y, Weng W, Hamilton M,
Chen L, Wintfeld N. Trends in the incidence of
diabetes, its clinical sequelae, and associated
costs in pregnancy. Diabetes Metab Res Rev
2015;31:707–716
167. Poltavskiy E, Kim DJ, Bang H. Comparison
of screening scores for diabetes and prediabetes.
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2016;118:146–153
168. Mission JF, Catov J, Deihl TE, Feghali M,
Scifres C. Early pregnancy diabetes screening and
diagnosis: prevalence, rates of abnormal test
results, and associated factors. Obstet Gynecol
2017;130:1136–1142
169. Cho NH, Shaw JE, Karuranga S, et al. IDF
Diabetes Atlas: global estimates of diabetes
prevalence for 2017 and projections for 2045.
Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2018;138:271–281
170. Britton LE, Hussey JM, Crandell JL, Berry DC,
Brooks JL, Bryant AG. Racial/ethnic disparities in
diabetes diagnosis and glycemic control among
women of reproductive age. J Womens Health
(Larchmt) 2018;27:1271–1277
171. Robbins C, Boulet SL, Morgan I, et al.
Disparities in preconception health indicators—
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System, 20132015, and Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring
System, 2013-2014. MMWR Surveill Summ 2018;
67:1–16
172. Yuen L, Wong VW, Simmons D. Ethnic
disparities in gestational diabetes. Curr Diab Rep
2018;18:68
173. Wahabi HA, Fayed A, Esmaeil S, et al.
Systematic review and meta-analysis of the
effectiveness of pre-pregnancy care for women
with diabetes for improving maternal and
perinatal outcomes. PLoS One 2020;15:e0237571
174. Zhu W-W, Yang H-X, Wei Y-M, et al.
Evaluation of the value of fasting plasma glucose
in the ﬁrst prenatal visit to diagnose gestational
diabetes mellitus in China. Diabetes Care 2013;36:
586–590
175. Ma~
ne L, Flores-Le Roux JA, G
omez N, et al.
Association of ﬁrst-trimester HbA1c levels with
adverse pregnancy outcomes in different ethnic
groups. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2019;150:202–210
176. Kattini R, Hummelen R, Kelly L. Early
gestational diabetes mellitus screening with
glycated hemoglobin: a systematic review. J
Obstet Gynaecol Can 2020;42:1379–1384
177. Chen L, Pocobelli G, Yu O, et al. Early
pregnancy hemoglobin A1C and pregnancy out-

comes: a population-based study. Am J Perinatol
2019;36:1045–1053
178. Osmundson SS, Zhao BS, Kunz L, et al. First
trimester hemoglobin A1c prediction of gestational
diabetes. Am J Perinatol 2016;33:977–982
179. McIntyre HD, Sacks DA, Barbour LA, et al.
Issues with the diagnosis and classiﬁcation of
hyperglycemia in early pregnancy. Diabetes Care
2016;39:53–54
180. Simmons D, Immanuel J, Hague WM, et al.;
TOBOGM Research Group. Treatment of gestational
diabetes mellitus diagnosed early in pregnancy. N
Engl J Med 2023;388:2132–2144
181. Cavagnolli G, Pimentel AL, Freitas PAC,
Gross JL, Camargo JL. Factors affecting A1C in
non-diabetic individuals: review and metaanalysis. Clin Chim Acta 2015;445:107–114
182. Buchanan TA, Xiang A, Kjos SL, Watanabe
R. What is gestational diabetes? Diabetes Care
2007;30(Suppl 2):S105–S111
183. Noctor E, Crowe C, Carmody LA, et al.;
ATLANTIC-DIP Investigators. Abnormal glucose
tolerance post-gestational diabetes mellitus as
deﬁned by the International Association of
Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups criteria.
Eur J Endocrinol 2016;175:287–297
184. Kim C, Newton KM, Knopp RH. Gestational
diabetes and the incidence of type 2 diabetes: a
systematic review. Diabetes Care 2002;25:1862–
1868
185. Liu Z, Zhang Q, Liu L, Liu W. Risk factors
associated with early postpartum glucose intolerance
in women with a history of gestational diabetes
mellitus: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Endocrine 2023;82:498–512
186. Ratner RE, Christophi CA, Metzger BE, et al.;
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group.
Prevention of diabetes in women with a history of
gestational diabetes: effects of metformin and
lifestyle interventions. J Clin Endocrinol Metab
2008;93:4774–4779
187. Aroda VR, Christophi CA, Edelstein SL,
et al.; Diabetes Prevention Program Research
Group. The effect of lifestyle intervention and
metformin on preventing or delaying diabetes
among women with and without gestational
diabetes: the Diabetes Prevention Program outcomes study 10-year follow-up. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab 2015;100:1646–1653
188. Vounzoulaki E, Khunti K, Abner SC, Tan BK,
Davies MJ, Gillies CL. Progression to type 2
diabetes in women with a known history of
gestational diabetes: systematic review and
meta-analysis. BMJ 2020;369:m1361
189. Metzger BE, Lowe LP, Dyer AR, et al.; HAPO
Study Cooperative Research Group. Hyper-glycemia
and adverse pregnancy outcomes. N Engl J Med
2008;358:1991–2002
190. O’Sullivan JB, Mahan CM. Criteria for the
oral glucose tolerance test in pregnancy. Diabetes
1964;13:278–285
191. Sacks DA, Hadden DR, Maresh M, et al.;
HAPO Study Cooperative Research Group.
Frequency of gestational diabetes mellitus
at collaborating centers based on IADPSG consensus
panel-recommended criteria: the Hyperglycemia
and Adverse Pregnancy Outcome (HAPO) study.
Diabetes Care 2012;35:526–528
192. Brown FM, Wyckoff J. Application of onestep IADPSG versus two-step diagnostic criteria
for gestational diabetes in the real world: impact

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

147. Gulsoy Kirnap N, Bozkus Y, Haberal M.
Analysis of risk factors for posttransplant diabetes
mellitus after kidney transplantation: single-center
experience. Exp Clin Transplant 2020;18:36–40
148. Sharif A, Moore RH, Baboolal K. The use of
oral glucose tolerance tests to risk stratify for
new-onset diabetes after transplantation: an
underdiagnosed phenomenon. Transplantation
2006;82:1667–1672
149. Galindo RJ, Fried M, Breen T, Tamler R.
Hyperglycemia management in patients with
posttransplantation diabetes. Endocr Pract 2016;22:
454–465
150. Jenssen T, Hartmann A. Emerging treatments
for post-transplantation diabetes mellitus. Nat Rev
Nephrol 2015;11:465–477
151. Thomas MC, Mathew TH, Russ GR, Rao
MM, Moran J. Early peri-operative glycaemic
control and allograft rejection in patients with
diabetes mellitus: a pilot study. Transplantation
2001;72:1321–1324
152. Greeley SAW, Polak M, Njølstad PR, et al.
ISPAD Clinical Practice Consensus Guidelines
2022: the diagnosis and management of monogenic diabetes in children and adolescents.
Pediatr Diabetes 2022;23:1188–1211
153. Carmody D, Støy J, Greeley S, Bell G,
Philipson L. Chapter 2. A clinical guide to
monogenic diabetes. In Genetic Diagnosis of
Endocrine Disorders. 2nd ed. Weiss RE, Refetoff
S, Eds. Philadelphia, PA, Elsevier, 2016, pp. 21–30
154. De Franco E, Flanagan SE, Houghton JAL,
et al. The effect of early, comprehensive genomic
testing on clinical care in neonatal diabetes: an
international cohort study. Lancet 2015;386:
957–963
155. Sanyoura M, Letourneau L, Knight Johnson
AE, et al. GCK-MODY in the US Monogenic
Diabetes Registry: description of 27 unpublished
variants. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2019;151:
231–236
156. Carmody D, Naylor RN, Bell CD, et al. GCKMODY in the US National Monogenic Diabetes
Registry: frequently misdiagnosed and unnecessarily
treated. Acta Diabetol 2016;53:703–708
157. Timsit J, Saint-Martin C, Dubois-Laforgue D,
Bellann
e-Chantelot C. Searching for maturityonset diabetes of the young (MODY): when and
what for? Can J Diabetes 2016;40:455–461
158. Awa WL, Schober E, Wiegand S, et al.
Reclassiﬁcation of diabetes type in pediatric
patients initially classiﬁed as type 2 diabetes
mellitus: 15 years follow-up using routine data
from the German/Austrian DPV database. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2011;94:463–467
159. Shields BM, Hicks S, Shepherd MH,
Colclough K, Hattersley AT, Ellard S. Maturityonset diabetes of the young (MODY): how many
cases are we missing? Diabetologia 2010;53:
2504–2508
160. Pihoker C, Gilliam LK, Ellard S, et al.;
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study Group.
Prevalence, characteristics and clinical diagnosis
of maturity onset diabetes of the young due to
mutations in HNF1A, HNF4A, and glucokinase:
results from the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 2013;98:4055–4062
161. Draznin B, Philipson LH, McGill JB. Atypical
diabetes: pathophysiology, clinical presentations,
and treatment options. Arlington, VA, American
Diabetes Association Arlington, 2018

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

diabetesjournals.org/care

environment and childhood adiposity. Diabetes Care
2021;44:1194–1202
201. Landon MB, Rice MM, Varner MW, et al.;
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development MaternalFetal Medicine Units (MFMU) Network. Mild
gestational diabetes mellitus and long-term child
health. Diabetes Care 2015;38:445–452
202. Tam WH, Ma RCW, Ozaki R, et al. In utero
exposure to maternal hyperglycemia increases
childhood cardiometabolic risk in offspring.
Diabetes Care 2017;40:679–686
203. Vandorsten JP, Dodson WC, Espeland MA,
et al. NIH consensus development conference:
diagnosing gestational diabetes mellitus. NIH
Consens State Sci Statements 2013;29:1–31
204. Committee on Practice Bulletins—Obstetrics.
ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 190: Gestational Diabetes
Mellitus. Obstet Gynecol 2018;131:e49–e64
205. Pillay J, Donovan L, Guitard S, et al.
Screening for gestational diabetes mellitus: a
systematic review to update the 2014 U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation.
In US Preventative Services Task Force Evidence
Syntheses, formerly Systematic Evidence Reviews.
Rockville, MD, Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality, 2021. Available from https://www
.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK573100/
206. Khalafallah A, Phuah E, Al-Barazan AM,
et al. Glycosylated haemoglobin for screening
and diagnosis of gestational diabetes mellitus.
BMJ Open 2016;6:e011059
207. Farrar D, Simmonds M, Bryant M, et al.
Treatments for gestational diabetes: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. BMJ Open 2017;7:
e015557
208. Carpenter MW, Coustan DR. Criteria for
screening tests for gestational diabetes. Am J
Obstet Gynecol 1982;144:768–773
209. National Diabetes Data Group. Classiﬁcation and diagnosis of diabetes mellitus and
other categories of glucose intolerance. Diabetes
1979;28:1039–1057

210. Harper LM, Mele L, Landon MB, et al.; Eunice
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development (NICHD) Maternal-Fetal
Medicine Units (MFMU) Network. CarpenterCoustan compared with national diabetes data
group criteria for diagnosing gestational diabetes.
Obstet Gynecol 2016;127:893–898
211. Mo X, Gai Tobe R, Takahashi Y, et al.
Economic evaluations of gestational diabetes
mellitus screening: a systematic review. J Epidemiol
2021;31:220–230
212. Wei Y, Yang H, Zhu W, et al. International
Association of Diabetes and Pregnancy Study
Group criteria is suitable for gestational diabetes
mellitus diagnosis: further evidence from China.
Chin Med J (Engl) 2014;127:3553–3556
213. Feldman RK, Tieu RS, Yasumura L.
Gestational diabetes screening: the International
Association of the Diabetes and Pregnancy Study
Groups compared with Carpenter-Coustan screening.
Obstet Gynecol 2016;127:10–17
214. Saccone G, Khalifeh A, Al-Kouatly HB,
Sendek K, Berghella V. Screening for gestational
diabetes mellitus: one step versus two step
approach. A meta-analysis of randomized trials. J
Matern Fetal Neonatal Med 2020;33:1616–1624
215. Ethridge JK, Catalano PM, Waters TP.
Perinatal outcomes associated with the diagnosis
of gestational diabetes made by the International
Association of the Diabetes and Pregnancy Study
Groups criteria. Obstet Gynecol 2014;124:571–
578
216. Mayo K, Melamed N, Vandenberghe H,
Berger H. The impact of adoption of the
international association of diabetes in pregnancy
study group criteria for the screening and diagnosis
of gestational diabetes. Am J Obstet Gynecol
2015;212:224.e1–224.e9
217. Selvin E. Hemoglobin A1c—using epidemiology to guide medical practice: Kelly West
Award Lecture 2020. Diabetes Care 2021;44:
2197–2204

S49

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S27/791502/dc25s002.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

on health services, clinical care, and outcomes.
Curr Diab Rep 2017;17:85
193. Lowe WL, Scholtens DM, Lowe LP, et al.;
HAPO Follow-up Study Cooperative Research
Group. Association of gestational diabetes with
maternal disorders of glucose metabolism and
childhood adiposity. JAMA 2018;320:1005–1016
194. Landon MB, Spong CY, Thom E, et al.;
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development Maternal-Fetal
Medicine Units Network. A multicenter, randomized trial of treatment for mild gestational
diabetes. N Engl J Med 2009;361:1339–1348
195. Crowther CA, Hiller JE, Moss JR, McPhee
AJ, Jeffries WS, Robinson JS, Australian Carbohydrate Intolerance Study in Pregnant Women
(ACHOIS) Trial Group. Effect of treatment of
gestational diabetes mellitus on pregnancy
outcomes. N Engl J Med 2005;352:2477–2486
196. Hillier TA, Pedula KL, Ogasawara KK, et al. A
pragmatic, randomized clinical trial of gestational
diabetes screening. N Engl J Med 2021;384:895–904
197. Coustan DR, Dyer AR, Metzger BE. Onestep or 2-step testing for gestational diabetes:
which is better? Am J Obstet Gynecol 2021;225:
634–644
198. Lowe WL, Scholtens DM, Kuang A, et al.;
HAPO Follow-up Study Cooperative Research
Group. Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy
Outcome Follow-up Study (HAPO FUS): maternal
gestational diabetes mellitus and childhood
glucose metabolism. Diabetes Care 2019;42:
372–380
199. Scholtens DM, Kuang A, Lowe LP, et al.;
HAPO Follow-Up Study Cooperative Research
Group. Hyperglycemia and Adverse Pregnancy
Outcome Follow-up Study (HAPO FUS): maternal
glycemia and childhood glucose metabolism.
Diabetes Care 2019;42:381–392
200. Josefson JL, Scholtens DM, Kuang A, et al.;
HAPO Follow-up Study Cooperative Research
Group. Newborn adiposity and cord blood
C-peptide as mediators of the maternal metabolic

Diagnosis and Classification of Diabetes

