S14

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee*

1. IMPROVING CARE AND PROMOTING HEALTH

Diabetes Care 2025;48(Suppl. 1):S14–S26 | https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-S001

The American Diabetes Association (ADA) “Standards of Care in Diabetes” includes
the ADA’s current clinical practice recommendations and is intended to provide the
components of diabetes care, general treatment goals and guidelines, and tools to
evaluate quality of care. Members of the ADA Professional Practice Committee, an interprofessional expert committee, are responsible for updating the Standards of Care
annually, or more frequently as warranted. For a detailed description of ADA standards, statements, and reports, as well as the evidence-grading system for ADA’s clinical practice recommendations and a full list of Professional Practice Committee
members, please refer to Introduction and Methodology. Readers who wish to comment on the Standards of Care are invited to do so at professional.diabetes.org/SOC.

DIABETES AND POPULATION HEALTH
Recommendations

1.1 Ensure treatment decisions are timely, rely on evidence-based guidelines,
capture key elements within the social determinants of health, and are made
collaboratively with people with or at risk for diabetes and caregivers based
on individual preferences, prognoses, comorbidities, and informed ﬁnancial
considerations. B
1.2 Align approaches to diabetes management with evidence-based care
models. These models emphasize person-centered team care, integrated longterm treatment approaches to diabetes and comorbidities, and ongoing collaborative communication and goal setting between all team members and
with people with diabetes. A
1.3 Care systems should facilitate in-person and virtual team-based care, include those knowledgeable and experienced in diabetes management as part
of the team, and utilize patient registries, decision support tools, proactive
care planning, and community involvement to meet needs of individuals with
diabetes. B
1.4 Assess diabetes management, risk factors, and complications (Table 4.1)
using reliable and relevant data metrics to improve processes of care and
health outcomes, with attention to care costs, individual preferences and
goals for care, and treatment burden. B
1.5 Health systems should adopt a culture of quality improvement, implement
benchmarking programs, and engage interprofessional teams to support sustainable and scalable process changes to improve quality of care and health
outcomes. A

*A complete list of members of the American
Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee
can be found at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SINT.
Duality of interest information for each author is
available at https://doi.org/10.2337/dc25-SDIS.
Suggested citation: American Diabetes Association
Professional Practice Committee. 1. Improving care
and promoting health in populations: Standards of
Care in Diabetes—2025. Diabetes Care 2025;48
(Suppl. 1):S14–S26
© 2024 by the American Diabetes Association.
Readers may use this article as long as the
work is properly cited, the use is educational
and not for proﬁt, and the work is not altered.
More information is available at https://www
.diabetesjournals.org/journals/pages/license.

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S14/791468/dc25s001.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

1. Improving Care and Promoting
Health in Populations: Standards
of Care in Diabetes—2025

diabetesjournals.org/care

education and support (DSMES) through
telehealth, mobile platforms, interprofessional team care, and engagement of community-based care partners and resources.
As SDOH have a central role in diabetes
burden, management, and outcomes, the
subsection TAILORING TREATMENT FOR SOCIAL CONTEXT discusses the importance of screening
individuals for SDOH, advises on strategies
to identify disparities in diabetes management and outcomes experienced by at-risk
populations, and offers actionable guidance for addressing SDOH and health
disparities at the individual and population levels.
State of Diabetes Care

The proportion of people with diabetes
who achieve recommended A1C, blood
pressure, and LDL cholesterol levels has
ﬂuctuated over the years, with some
improvement over time (4,5). In 2015–
2018 (the most recent time period with
population-level data available), just 50.5%
of U.S. community-dwelling adults with diabetes achieved A1C <7% and 75.4%
achieved A1C <8% (5). The goal blood
pressure of <130/80 mmHg was achieved
by just 47.7% of adults with diabetes,
while 70.4% achieved blood pressure
<140/90 mmHg (5). Lipid goals, deﬁned
in these studies as non-HDL cholesterol
<130 mg/dL, was achieved by 55.7% of
adults with diabetes, and all three risk factors were treated to goal in just 22.2% (5).
Importantly, many people who did not attain A1C, blood pressure, and lipid goals
were not receiving any or adequate pharmacotherapy for glycemic, hypertension,
and dyslipidemia management, respectively, which underscores the urgent need
for care delivery systems and structural facilitators (i.e., health and public health policies and payment models) that enable
timely and equitable delivery of evidencebased care and address diabetes prevention and treatment in communities (5).
Many segments of the population, such as
children, young adults, and individuals
with complex health needs, ﬁnancial or
other social hardships, and/or limited English proﬁciency, as well as individuals in
groups that have been historically marginalized, face particular challenges to diabetes
management (6–8). A U.S. population–
based study based on National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) data
showed that younger people with diabetes,
Mexican American people, non-Hispanic

Black people, those with a lower level of
educational attainment, and those who
are underinsured are most likely to be undertreated, particularly for glycemic management (5).
Gaps and disparities in diabetes management and outcomes are also prevalent among youth with diabetes in the
U.S. Data from SEARCH for Diabetes in
Youth (SEARCH), a population-based registry network of ﬁve centers across ﬁve
U.S. states, showed that in 2014–2019,
mean A1C was 9.1% (SD 2.0) among
youth and young adults with type 1 diabetes and 8.9% (SD 2.9) in youth and
young adults with type 2 diabetes; these
values increased from 8.5% (SD 1.5) and
8.4% (SD 2.8), respectively, in 2002–2007
(9). In youth and young adults with type 1
diabetes, identifying as a non-Hispanic
Black person or a Native American person (compared with identifying as a nonHispanic White person), being younger,
not being treated with insulin pump
therapy, and having low annual household income were associated with a
higher A1C level (9). Data from the T1D
Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative (T1DX-QI), a learning health network
of pediatric and adult centers across the
U.S., revealed that between 2016 and
2018, mean A1C was 8.1% (65 mmol/mol)
among children with type 1 diabetes
5 years of age and 9.3% (78 mmol/mol)
among children 15–18 years of age. Only
17% of youth under 18 years of age with
type 1 diabetes achieved the recommended
A1C goal of <7.5% (<58 mmol/mol),
and A1C levels for non-Hispanic Black
youth were higher than those for nonHispanic or Hispanic White youth—a disparity that persisted after adjustment for
socioeconomic status (10).
Diabetes and its associated health
complications pose a signiﬁcant ﬁnancial hardship to individuals and society.
It is estimated that the annual cost of
diagnosed diabetes in the U.S. in 2022
was $413 billion, including $307 billion
in direct health care costs and $106 billion
in reduced productivity (11). After adjusting for inﬂation, the economic costs of diabetes increased by 7% between 2017
and 2022 and by 35% between 2012 and
2022 (11). This is attributed to both the
increased prevalence of diabetes and
the higher cost per person with diabetes. People living with diabetes also face
ﬁnancial hardship, which is correlated

S15

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S14/791468/dc25s001.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

Population health is deﬁned as “the
health outcomes of a group of individuals, including the distribution of health
outcomes within the group” (1). These
outcomes can be measured in terms of
health indicators (mortality, morbidity,
and functional status), disease epidemiology (incidence and prevalence), and behavioral and metabolic factors (physical
activity, nutrition, A1C, time in range, etc.)
(1). Clinical practice recommendations are
tools for health care professionals who
seek to improve health across populations; however, for optimal outcomes, diabetes care must also be individualized for
each person with diabetes and for each
person’s context, as well as across the life
span. Thus, efforts to improve population
health will require a combination of policy-level, system-level, and person-level
approaches. With such an integrated approach in mind, the American Diabetes
Association (ADA) highlights the importance of person-centered care, deﬁned
as care that considers an individual’s comorbidities and prognoses; is respectful
of and responsive to individual preferences, needs, and values; and ensures that
the individual’s values guide all clinical
decisions (2). Social determinants of
health (SDOH)—factors often beyond
an individual’s direct control and potentially representing lifelong risks—play a
signiﬁcant role in both clinical and psychosocial outcomes. To improve health, support overall well-being, and eliminate
disparities, it is crucial to address these
determinants, particularly for individuals
from racial and ethnic minority communities, underserved geographic areas (rural
or urban), and those facing socioeconomic
barriers to care and health (3). This section discusses the current state of diabetes and diabetes care in the U.S. and
provides guidance for health care professionals as well as health systems, community partners, payors, and policymakers on
improving the delivery of diabetes care to
improve the health of all people at risk
for or living with diabetes.
To provide actionable guidance for improving the care for and health outcomes
of people with and at risk for diabetes,
this section examines care delivery and
payment models demonstrated to support high-quality, evidence-based care;
offers guidance on practical strategies for
system-level improvement; and discusses
opportunities to expand access to health
care and diabetes self-management

Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

S16

Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

Evidence-Based Care Models to Improve
Population Health

A major barrier to optimal and comprehensive diabetes care is a delivery system
that is often fragmented, lacks clinical information capabilities, is not appropriately incentivized and funded, does not
adequately engage people with diabetes
and the communities where they live, and
is poorly designed for the coordinated and
longitudinal delivery of chronic care (14).
Several models have been demonstrated
to improve aspects of diabetes care delivery and health outcomes.
The Chronic Care Model (CCM) is a
commonly used framework for describing diabetes care programs (15). It includes six core elements to optimize the
care of people with chronic disease:
1. Delivery system design (moving from a
reactive to a proactive care delivery system where planned visits are coordinated through a team-based approach)
2. Self-management support
3. Decision support, particularly at the
point of care during a clinical encounter (basing care on evidence-based,
effective care guidelines)
4. Clinical information systems (using
registries that can provide personspeciﬁc and population-based support to the care team)
5. Community resources and policies
(identifying or developing resources
to support healthy lifestyles)
6. Health systems (to create a qualityoriented culture)
Randomized controlled trials of CCM
interventions have shown that while interventions vary, programs that include
core components of the CCM decrease
A1C (mean difference –0.21% [95% CI
–0.30 to –0.13], P <0.001 compared
with usual care), with greater improvements seen among adults with higher
baseline A1C and with interventions that

include four or more CCM elements (16).
CCM-aligned programs also improved
blood pressure levels and processes of diabetes care (e.g., screening for complications of diabetes), though there was no
impact on cholesterol levels, tobacco use,
or weight (17). Multiple studies have examined individual components of the
CCM with respect to diabetes management and have found inconsistent levels
of beneﬁt with case management, teambased care, use of electronic patient registries, clinician education, clinician and patient reminders, and patient education
and promotion of individual self-management (18). The inconsistencies in ﬁndings
may be driven by heterogeneity of interventions, settings, and evaluation strategies.
Collaborative, interprofessional teams,
which can bring together multiple disciplines within the health care system,
payors, and community partners, are
best suited to provide care for people with
chronic conditions such as diabetes and
to facilitate individuals’ self-management
(Table 1.1) (19–25). The care team, which
centers around the person with diabetes,
should avoid therapeutic inertia and prioritize timely and appropriate intensiﬁcation of behavior change (nutrition and
physical activity), pharmacologic therapy,
and/or social and ﬁnancial support systems
for individuals who have not achieved
recommended metabolic goals or are
experiencing high burden of treatment.
Initiatives such as the Patient-Centered
Medical Home (PCMH) model can improve
health outcomes by fostering comprehensive primary care and offering new opportunities for team-based chronic disease
management (26–28). Accountable Care
Organizations (ACOs), a primary care–
centered delivery and payment model,
can support the implementation of the
CCM and ultimately improve diabetesrelated metrics in participating organizations
(29). The Accountable Health Communities
Model was introduced to support identifying and addressing health-related social
needs to improve disease management
and health outcomes (30); early evidence
showed reduction in emergency department use among Medicare and Medicaid
beneﬁciaries, but diabetes-speciﬁc metrics were not examined, and program effectiveness has been limited by scarcity
of resources to meet identiﬁed healthrelated social needs (31). Alternative Payment Models (APMs) have had mixed
effects on diabetes care delivery and

outcomes, with higher-risk APMs (i.e.,
models with greater ﬁnancial risk assumed
by the provider, such as capitated payment
models) generally associated with greater
improvements in diabetes care processes
than lower-risk APMs (32). Value-based
payment models are hypothesized to
better support the implementation and
sustainability of innovative care delivery
models seeking to improve population
health (26,33), though evidence for currently available value-based insurance designs is limited (32).
Telehealth

Telehealth uses digital tools like video
conferencing, mobile apps, and remote
monitoring to deliver a range of health
services remotely, including clinical care,
education, and administrative support.
Telemedicine, a subset of telehealth,
focuses speciﬁcally on remote clinical care,
such as diagnosis, treatment, and consultations through real-timecommunication. Increased access to and effective use of
telehealth services, alongside in-person
care, can enhance timely access to diabetes care and DSMES services for individuals with diabetes (34–38).
Telehealth should be used to complement but not replace in-person visits for
optimal glycemic management (39,40). Increasingly, evidence suggests that various
telehealth modalities may facilitate reducing A1C in people with type 2 diabetes
compared with usual care or in addition to
usual care (41), and ﬁndings suggest that
telemedicine is a safe method of delivering
care for people with type 1 diabetes in rural areas (42). For rural populations or
those with limited physical access to health
care, telehealth has a growing body of
evidence for its effectiveness, particularly
with regard to glycemic management as
measured by A1C (43–46). In addition,
evidence supports the effectiveness
of telehealth in hypertension and dyslipidemia interventions (47). Interactive
strategies that facilitate communication
between health care professionals and
people with diabetes, including the use
of web-based portals or text messaging
and those that incorporate medication
adjustment, appear to be effective in improving outcomes (44,48). Telehealth and
other virtual environments can be used to
offer diabetes self-management education and clinical support and remove
geographic and transportation barriers
for individuals living in underresourced

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S14/791468/dc25s001.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

with higher A1C, diabetes distress, and
depressive symptoms (12).
The growing gaps in diabetes care
quality and outcomes, the high and rising
costs of diabetes care across the U.S., and
the disparities experienced by individuals
from racial and ethnic minoritized backgrounds and those facing socioeconomic
barriers to care call for urgent, substantial, and multisectoral system-level improvements to care delivery (13).

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

diabetesjournals.org/care

Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

S17

Table 1.1—Considerations for engaging interprofessional members of a comprehensive, person-centered diabetes care
team to identify and meet the needs of people with diabetes across the life span
Subpopulation of a person with diabetes
All adults with diabetes

Team members to engage in care
Primary care clinician, CDCES, RDN, and other
specialists as available and appropriate to
treat comorbidities (Table 4.1)

Unique care considerations
Assess for and address social determinants
of health.

All youth with diabetes

Primary care clinician, pediatric
endocrinologist, CDCES, RDN, other
specialists as available and appropriate to
treat comorbidities (Table 14.1), daycare
or school nurse or other professional,
behavioral health professional (as needed),
and parent(s) or caregiver(s)

Assess for and address social determinants of
health and barriers to safety, well-being,
and academic performance in school.
Engage professionals within the school and
extracurricular/after-school activities to
ensure safe diabetes management. An
individualized diabetes medical
management plan should be developed in
collaboration with school professionals
and parent(s) or caregiver(s).
Support gradual developmentally appropriate
transfer of self-management from
caregivers to the youth with diabetes.

Individuals with diabetes and
diabetes-related complications or
comorbidities

Specialist referrals as appropriate and
available (e.g., behavioral health
professional, cardiologist, eye specialist,
gastroenterologist or hepatologist,
neurologist, nephrologist, obesity medicine
specialist, or podiatrist), care coordinator/
navigator or case manager, and clinical
pharmacist (for those with polypharmacy
or complex medication plans)

Screen for functional, cognitive, ﬁnancial, and
logistical barriers to self-management and
evidence that self-care demands exceed
capacity and available resources and
support systems.

Individuals with social and/or structural
barriers to care

Care coordinator/navigator, social services
professional, insurance specialist/navigator,
peer-to-peer support (as available),
community health worker and/or community
paramedic (as available), public health
professional, and interpreter (as applicable)

Consider each person’s psychosocial needs,
available resources, and support systems.

Older adults

Geriatric medicine specialist, social services
professional, case manager, community
services provider, and physical and/or
occupational therapist as available and
appropriate based on functional status
and independence

Consider the older adult’s nutritional status,
including ability to afford (ﬁnancial
barriers), acquire (accessibility), prepare
(cooking), and consume (oral health)
nutritious food.
Assess for and address needs related to
vision, hearing, dexterity, cognition,
mobility, and other challenges.

Individuals in long-term care settings

Long-term care facility clinicians, nurses, other Engage professionals within the long-term
health care professionals, physical and
care facility to ensure safe and appropriate
occupational therapists, and RDN
diabetes management.

Pregnant individuals with diabetes

Maternal-fetal medicine specialist or obstetrician
experienced in the care of pregnant
individuals with diabetes (particularly for
individuals with type 1 diabetes or requiring
intensive insulin therapy), CDCES, RDN, eye
specialist (particularly for individuals with
preexisting type 1 or type 2 diabetes), other
specialists as appropriate, and lactation
consultant as appropriate

Ensure appropriate postpartum follow-up and
care, including transition from obstetric
care to established primary care.

Individuals with behavioral
health conditions

Behavioral health professional, care
coordinator/navigator, and social services
professional as age and situation
appropriate

Use age- and situation-appropriate screening
protocols for general and diabetes-related
psychosocial concerns.

CDCES, certiﬁed diabetes care and education specialist; RDN, registered dietitian nutritionist.

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S14/791468/dc25s001.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

Adults treated with intensive insulin therapy, Clinicians and other health care team
including multiple daily injections of
members experienced in advanced diabetes
insulin and insulin pump therapy
management, including technology use

S18

Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

Strategies for System-Level Improvement

Optimal diabetes management requires
a systematic approach and coordinated
team of health care professionals working in an environment where personcentered, high-quality care is a priority
(8,17,53,54). While many diabetes care
processes and access to technologies
have improved nationally in the past decade, the overall quality of care for people with diabetes remains suboptimal
(5). Efforts to increase the quality of diabetes care include providing care that is
concordant with evidence-based guidelines (54), expanding the role of teams
to implement more intensive disease
management strategies (19), tracking
medication-taking behavior (55), redesigning care processes (56), implementing
electronic health record (EHR) population
health tools (57), empowering and educating people with diabetes (58), reducing
ﬁnancial barriers (59), leveraging telehealth
to improve access to care (43), assessing
and addressing psychosocial issues (60,61),
and engaging community resources and
public policies that support healthy lifestyles (62). The National Diabetes Education
Program maintains an online resource
(cdc.gov/diabetes/php/toolkits/index.
html) to help health care professionals
design and implement more effective
health care delivery systems for people
with diabetes. Given the pluralistic needs
of people with diabetes and that the
challenges they experience (complex insulin treatment plans, new technologies,
changes in capacity for self-management,
etc.) vary over the course of disease
management and life span, engagement
of an interprofessional team with complementary expertise is essential (20).
Behaviors and Well-being

Successful diabetes care also requires a
systematic approach to supporting the

behavior-change efforts of people with diabetes. High-quality DSMES has been shown
to improve a person’s self-management,
satisfaction, and glycemic outcomes (see
Section 5, “Facilitating Positive Health
Behaviors and Well-being to Improve
Health Outcomes,” for a detailed review
of the evidence supporting DSMES). National DSMES standards call for an integrated approach that includes clinical
content and skills, behavioral strategies
(goal setting, problem-solving, etc.), and
engagement with psychosocial concerns
(61). Increasingly, such support is available through online or mobile platforms
that can support user access and effectiveness. These curricula should be tailored to
the needs of their intended populations,
including addressing the “digital divide,”
i.e., access to the technology required for
implementation (46,63).
Cost Considerations for Medication-Taking
Behaviors

The cost of diabetes medications and devices is an ongoing barrier to achieving
glycemic goals. Based on a national survey conducted in 2021, 18.6% of U.S.
adults with type 1 diabetes and 15.8% of
adults with insulin-treated type 2 diabetes
reported rationing (i.e., skipping, taking
less, and/or delaying) their insulin to save
money (64). Insulin underuse due to cost
has been termed “cost-related medication nonadherence” (here referred to as
cost-related barriers to medication use).
The ADA Insulin Access and Affordability Working Group has recommended
system-level approaches to address this
issue, including concepts such as costsharing for insured people with diabetes
based on the lowest price available, a list
price for insulins that closely reﬂects the
net price, and health plans that ensure
people with diabetes can access insulin
without undue administrative burden or
excessive cost (65). In 2021, the Centers
for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS)
launched the Part D Senior Savings Model
(66), which requires participating plans
to cover insulins with a $35 maximum
monthly out-of-pocket payment. In 2022,
43% of stand-alone Part D plan enrollees
and 60% of Medicare Advantage Part D
plan enrollees participated in the Senior
Savings Model (67). Most recently, the Inﬂation Reduction Act of 2022 capped
out-of-pocket payments for insulin at $35
per insulin per month for all Medicare
beneﬁciaries. A patchwork of solutions

has also been introduced for individuals
with commercial insurance and those
without health insurance. Over the past
5 years, 25 states and the District of Columbia have capped out-of-pocket expenditures
for insulin in select state-regulated commercial health plans (68). Between 2023 and
2024, three major insulin manufacturers
similarly lowered the price of insulin to
$35 per month in select circumstances
(69). These programs may help reduce
the ﬁnancial hardship of diabetes management, though many are challenging
to navigate, not all people with diabetes
can beneﬁt, and costs for insulin delivery
and glucose monitoring remain high.
Thus, all people with diabetes should be
screened for ﬁnancial hardship of treatment, cost-related barriers to medication
use, and rationing of other essential services due to medical costs (70).
The cost of medications (not only insulin) inﬂuences prescribing patterns and
medication use because of the ﬁnancial
strain on the person with diabetes and
the lack of secondary payor support
(public and private insurance) for effective approved glucose-lowering, cardiovascular and kidney disease risk–reducing,
and weight management therapies. There
is robust evidence of disparities in the
use of evidence-based therapies among
individuals from racial and ethnic minoritized backgrounds, those with lower income levels, those living in rural areas,
and those with limited insurance coverage (4,71–80). Financial barriers remain a
major source of health disparities, and
costs should be a focus of treatment
goals and clinical decisions (81). (See
TAILORING TREATMENT FOR SOCIAL CONTEXT.) Reduction in cost-related barriers to medication
use is associated with better health outcomes and quality of life (82).
Access to Care

The Affordable Care Act and Medicaid expansion have increased access to care for
many individuals with diabetes, emphasizing
the protection of people with preexisting
conditions, health promotion, and disease
prevention (83). In fact, health insurance
coverage increased from 84.7% in 2009 to
90.1% in 2016 for adults with diabetes aged
18–64 years. As of early 2022, more than
35 million people in the U.S. were enrolled
in some form of Affordable Care Act–related
health insurance (84). Coverage for those
aged $65 years remained nearly universal
(85). People with diabetes who have either

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S14/791468/dc25s001.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

areas or with disabilities (49). Telehealth
resources can also have a role in improving
diabetes management in children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes (50) and
addressing SDOH in young adults with diabetes (51). Optimally leveraging telehealth
to improve diabetes management requires
anticipating and addressing barriers posed
by cost, capacity, and resources (including
broadband internet access) of people with
diabetes and the existing clinical infrastructure into which telehealth approaches are
being integrated (52).

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

diabetesjournals.org/care

will therefore require improving availability of and access to primary and specialty
services necessary to meet the full range
of their health care needs (Table 1.1).
Quality Improvement

A recent Cochrane systematic review
concluded that quality improvement (QI)
can signiﬁcantly improve outcomes for
people with diabetes (18). As mandated
by the Affordable Care Act, the Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality developed a National Quality Strategy based
on three aims: improving the health of
populations, improving overall quality
and the personal experience of care, and
reducing per capita cost (95). QI methods
have been documented to improve diabetes device uptake, increase screening
for psychosocial care, and reduce inequities in access to diabetes technologies
(96–99). Information and guidance speciﬁc
to quality improvement and practice transformation for diabetes care are available
from the National Institute of Diabetes
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases guidance on diabetes care and quality (100).
A successful QI team should include a
clinical champion, administrative leader,
QI/data specialist, and an individual living with or impacted by diabetes. Using
patient registries and EHRs, health systems can evaluate the quality of diabetes
care being delivered, benchmark metrics, and perform intervention cycles as
part of QI strategies (13,57,101). QI
can also be used as an effective strategy to support application of clinical
practice recommendations by health care
professionals.
In addition to QI approaches, other
strategies that simultaneously improve
the quality of care and potentially reduce costs are gaining momentum and
include reimbursement structures that,
in contrast to visit-based billing, reward
the provision of appropriate and highquality care to achieve metabolic goals
(102); value-based payments; and incentives that accommodate personalized care goals (8,103). See EVIDENCE-BASED
CARE MODELS TO IMPROVE POPULATION HEALTH,
above, for more information.
TAILORING TREATMENT FOR
SOCIAL CONTEXT
Recommendations

1.6 Health systems should assess and
address disparities in diabetes care

and health outcomes (e.g., by stratifying clinical quality data by factors
such as insurance status, race, ethnicity, preferred language for health care
discussions, disability, and other social
determinants of health). C (104)
1.7 During clinical encounters, assess
for social determinants of health, including food insecurity, A housing
insecurity, ﬁnancial barriers, health insurance and health care access, environmental and neighborhood factors,
and social capital/social community
support, B to inform treatment decisions, with referral to appropriate local community resources.
1.8 Provide people with diabetes
additional self-management support
from lay health coaches, navigators,
or community health workers when
available. A
1.9 Consider the involvement of community health workers to support
management of diabetes and cardiovascular risk factors, especially in underserved communities and health
care systems. B
Health inequities related to diabetes and
its complications are well documented,
are heavily inﬂuenced by SDOH, and
have been associated with greater risk
for developing diabetes, higher disease
prevalence, and worse diabetes-related
outcomes (104–106). SDOH are deﬁned
as the economic, environmental, political, and social conditions in which people live and are responsible for a major
part of health inequality worldwide
(107). Greater exposure to adverse SDOH
over the life course results in poor health
(108). Interventions to address SDOH
can improve diabetes-related outcomes
(104,109). Using clinical quality data to
identify inequities and opportunities for
improvement is valuable for health care
professionals, health systems, payors, policymakers, and people with diabetes (110).
The Joint Commission requires that all accredited organizations in its ambulatory
health care, behavioral health care and human services, critical access hospital, and
hospital accreditation programs collect race
and ethnicity information and implement
speciﬁc steps to reduce health care disparities. The Joint Commission speciﬁcally requires that organizations designate an
individual or individuals) to lead efforts to
reduce health care disparities, assess

S19

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S14/791468/dc25s001.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

private or public insurance coverage are
more likely to meet quality indicators for diabetes care (86). However, even individuals
with insurance coverage can experience
ﬁnancial barriers to care, particularly if enrolled in high-deductible health plans. In
2021, 28% of individuals with employersponsored health plans were enrolled in
high-deductible health plans (87). Such
plans are increasing in popularity; by 2023,
51% of private industry employees had
the option to enroll in a high-deductible
health plan, although only 36% had access
to health savings accounts, which can offset
some of the out-of-pocket costs incurred
with high-deductible plans (88). Switching
to a high-deductible health plan has been
shown to increase ﬁnancial hardship
among people with diabetes (89), decrease and delay screening for retinopathy
(90), decrease blood pressure and A1C
monitoring (90), and increase the risks
of experiencing both acute (severe hypoglycemia, hyperglycemic crises) (91) and
chronic (myocardial infarction, stroke,
hospitalization for heart failure, kidney
failure, lower-extremity complications,
proliferative retinopathy, and blindness)
(92) diabetes complications. Insurance
coverage and formulary design inﬂuence
treatment decisions; it is essential that
payors cover evidence-based diabetes care
with minimal cost sharing by the person
with diabetes. Health care teams should
also discuss insurance coverage and ﬁnancial barriers to care with all individuals with
diabetes and pursue therapeutic strategies
that minimize ﬁnancial hardship.
Access to primary and specialty care
is also essential for people with diabetes. While most adults with diabetes
have access to a primary care clinician
(a 2016 nationally representative population-based study found that 88% of
adults with diabetes saw a primary care
clinician in the prior year) (93), fewer
have access to specialty endocrinology/
diabetes care (94). A study of Medicare
beneﬁciaries found that just 33% of
older adults with type 1 diabetes, 14%
of adults with type 2 diabetes and history of severe hypoglycemia, and 9% of
other adults with type 2 diabetes saw
an endocrinologist in 2019 (94). Racial
and ethnic minoritized individuals, those
with low income, those living in rural
areas, and those residing in a longterm care facility were less likely to
receive endocrinology care. Improving
health outcomes for people with diabetes

Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

S20

Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

ultimately not addressed—during the
clinical encounter (106). Among people
with chronic illnesses, two-thirds of
those who reported not taking medications as prescribed due to cost-related
barriers never shared this information
with their physician (121). A study using
data from the National Health Interview
Survey (NHIS) (106) found that half of
adults with diabetes reported ﬁnancial
stress and about 20% reported food insecurity. Studies of both type 1 diabetes
and type 2 diabetes have noted an association of one or more adverse SDOH
with health care utilization and poor diabetes outcomes among individuals
with diabetes (121,122). It is therefore
important for people with diabetes to
be screened for SDOH during clinical encounters and be referred to appropriate
clinical and community resources to address these needs (Table 1.1). Furthermore, health systems may beneﬁt from
compiling an inventory of such resources to facilitate referrals at the point of
care. Policies and payment models that
support addressing SDOH, both within
and outside the health care setting, are
needed to ensure that these efforts are
both feasible and sustainable. One example of a statewide payment model that
incentivizes value-based care, addressing
SDOH and funding community-based
health care professionals, is the Maryland
Total Cost of Care Model, although it is
currently limited by a narrow focus on
preventing diabetes and does not consider diabetes care quality or health outcomes in people with diabetes (110,123).
Another population in which such issues must be considered is older adults,
for whom social difﬁculties may further
impair quality of life and increase the
risk of functional dependency (124) (see
Section 13, “Older Adults,” for a detailed discussion of social considerations
in older adults).
Creating system-level mechanisms to
screen for SDOH may help overcome
structural barriers and communication
gaps between people with diabetes and
health care professionals (106,125). A
number of studies have proven the effectiveness of identifying SDOH by using
validated screening tools (126). In addition, brief, validated screening tools for
some SDOH exist and could facilitate
discussion around factors that signiﬁcantly impact treatment during the clinical encounter.

Food Insecurity

Food insecurity is a household-level economic and social condition of limited or
uncertain access to adequate food (127).
In 2022, almost 13% of Americans were
food insecure (127), and food insecurity is
associated with increased risk of type 2
diabetes and higher-than-recommended
glycemia (128,129). The rate is disproportionately higher among some groups
that have been historically marginalized,
low-income households, and households
headed by single mothers. Additionally,
those facing food insecurity have lower
engagement in self-care behaviors and
medication use, have higher rates of depression and diabetes distress, and have
worse glycemic management compared
with individuals who are food secure
(128,129). Older adults with food insecurity are more likely to have emergency department visits and hospitalizations
compared with older adults who do not
report food insecurity (130). Risk for food insecurity can be assessed with a validated
two-item screening tool (131) that includes
the following statements: 1) “Within the
past 12 months, we worried whether our
food would run out before we got money
to buy more” and 2) “Within the past 12
months the food we bought just didn’t
last, and we didn’t have money to get
more.” Interventions such as food prescription programs are considered promising to
address food insecurity by integrating
community resources into primary care
settings and directly dealing with food
deserts in underserved communities
(132).
In those with diabetes and food insecurity, the priority is mitigating the increased risk for severe hyperglycemia
and hypoglycemia (133,134). The reasons
for the increased risk of hyperglycemia
can include the consumption of inexpensive carbohydrate-rich processed foods,
binge eating, ﬁnancial constraints to ﬁlling
diabetes medication prescriptions, anxiety and depression, and poor sleep, all
contributing to hyperglycemia and poor
diabetes self-care behaviors. Hypoglycemia can occur due to inadequate or
inconsistent carbohydrate consumption
following the administration of sulfonylurea or insulin. Health care professionals
should consider these factors when making treatment decisions for people with
food insecurity and seek local resources
to help people with diabetes and their

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S14/791468/dc25s001.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

health-related social needs and provide information on community resources to
meet these needs, identify health care disparities by stratifying quality and safety
data using sociodemographic characteristics, develop an action plan to address
health care disparities, work to actively reduce health care disparities, and inform key
stakeholders about progress to reduce
health care disparities (111). The CMS
Framework for Health Equity similarly prioritizes collection, reporting, and analysis of
standardized individual-level demographic (including race, ethnicity, language,
gender identity, sex, sexual orientation, and
disability status) and SDOH data as well as
assessing for and addressing disparities
through improved access to culturally tailored services, team-based care, and community resources (112). Quality measures
assessing SDOH screening and intervention
have been introduced by the National Committee for Quality Assurance (focused on
food, housing, and transportation insecurity) (113) and CMS (focused on food, housing, and transportation insecurity, utility
difﬁculties, and interpersonal safety) (114).
Outside of SDOH, there are several
contributors to inequities, including bias,
institutional practices, and systemic factors (115–117). The ADA recognizes the
association between interpersonal, social,
and environmental factors and the prevention and treatment of diabetes and
has issued a call for research that seeks
to better understand how social determinants inﬂuence behaviors and how the
relationships between these variables
might be modiﬁed for enhancing the
prevention and management of diabetes (104). While a comprehensive strategy to reduce diabetes-related health
disparities in populations is yet to be
formally studied, general recommendations from other chronic disease management and prevention models can be
drawn upon to inform system-level strategies in diabetes (118). For example, the
National Academy of Medicine has published a framework for educating health
care professionals on the importance of
SDOH (119). Furthermore, there are resources available for the inclusion of
standardized sociodemographic variables
in EHRs to facilitate the measurement of
health disparities and the impact of interventions designed to reduce those disparities (95,119,120).
SDOH are not consistently recognized
and often go undiscussed—and are

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

diabetesjournals.org/care

family members obtain nutritious food
more regularly (135).
Housing Insecurity

Refugee, Migrant, and Seasonal
Agricultural Workers

Refugee status, like having a diabetes diagnosis, is an independent risk factor for
cardiovascular disease (140). In areas undergoing humanitarian crises, refugees
are at greater risk for obstacles to achieving optimal chronic disease management,
but unfortunately there are few quality investigations into the particular situations
of refugees with diabetes. There have
been efforts to develop models of care
speciﬁcally aimed at improving the health
of refugee populations, but more work is
needed to demonstrate effectiveness of
those care models and approaches (141).
Migrant and seasonal agricultural
workers likely have a higher risk of type 2
diabetes than the general population.
While migrant farmworker–speciﬁc data
are lacking, most agricultural workers in
the U.S. are Latino, a population with a
high rate of type 2 diabetes. In addition,
living in severe poverty brings with it food
insecurity, high chronic stress, and an increased risk of diabetes; there is also an
association between the exposure to

certain pesticides and the incidence of diabetes (142).
Data from the Department of Labor
indicate that there are approximately
2.18 million agricultural workers in the
U.S. (143). These agricultural workers often travel throughout the country seasonally (144), although less so than in past
decades. According to 2022 health center
data, 175 health centers across the U.S.
reported providing care to 843,071 adult
migrant farmworkers, and 91,839 had encounters for diabetes (142). In a 2023 report on the National Agricultural Workers
Survey, age-adjusted self-reported diabetes prevalence was 13.51% (95% CI 10.0–
17.1) among migrant farmworkers and
10.8% (95% CI 9.0–12.6) among nonmigrant farmworkers (142).
Migrant farmworkers and other agricultural workers encounter numerous and
overlapping barriers to receiving care. Migration, which might occur as frequently
as every few weeks for some, disrupts
care. Common barriers to adequate diabetes care include those related to cost,
culture, language, literacy, transportation,
geographic distance, food access, long
work hours, unfamiliarity with new communities, the complexity of the U.S.
health care system, and limited access to
various other resources like medications
and DSMES (144). Without regular care,
farmworkers with diabetes can experience
severe and often expensive complications
that incur morbidity and mortality and affect quality of life. Nontraditional care delivery models, including mobile integrated
health and telehealth, should be leveraged
to improve access to high-quality care.
Health care professionals need to be attuned to the working and living conditions
of people with diabetes. For example, if
a farmworker with diabetes presents for
care, appropriate referrals should be initiated to social workers and community
resources, as available, to assist with removing barriers to care.
Language Barriers

Health systems and health care professionals caring for those with limited
English proﬁciency should develop or offer educational programs and materials
in culturally appropriate languages. Professional language assistance (i.e., interpreters)
should be provided to individuals with limited English proﬁciency and/or other

communication needs at no cost to them
(145). Use of untrained interpreters, including family members, should be avoided
when possible, as this can result in confusing or inaccurate conveyance of information. Accompanying written materials
should be in the language appropriate for
the individual being supported and at a
reading level that is not overly complicated—typically this is deﬁned as a sixthgrade reading level. The National Standards
for Culturally and Linguistically Appropriate
Services in Health and Health Care (National CLAS Standards) provide guidance
on how health care professionals can reduce language barriers by improving
their cultural competency, addressing
health literacy, and ensuring communication with professional language assistance (145). In addition, the National
CLAS Standards website offers several
resources and materials that can be used
to improve the quality of care delivery to
individuals with limited English proﬁciency (145).
Health Literacy and Numeracy

Health literacy is the degree to which
individuals can obtain, process, and understand basic health information and
services needed to make appropriate
decisions (146,147). Health literacy is
strongly associated with individuals engaging in complex disease management
and self-care (148). Approximately 9 out
of 10 American adults are estimated
to have limited or low health literacy
(146,149). Clinicians and diabetes care
and education specialists should provide
easy-to-understand information and reduce unnecessary complexity when developing care plans. Interventions addressing
low health literacy in populations with diabetes seem effective in improving diabetes outcomes, including ones focusing
primarily on education, self-care training,
or disease management. Combining easily
adapted materials with formal diabetes education demonstrates effectiveness on clinical and behavioral outcomes in populations
with low literacy (150). However, more research is needed to establish the most effective strategies for enhancing retention
and application of diabetes knowledge
among various populations of people
with diabetes (148,151).
Health numeracy is also essential in diabetes prevention and management. Health
numeracy requires primary numeric skills,

S21

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S14/791468/dc25s001.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

Housing insecurity has been shown to be
directly associated with a person’s ability to
maintain their diabetes self-management
(136). Housing insecurity often accompanies other barriers that challenge diabetes
self-management. Food insecurity, lack of
insurance, cognitive impairment, behavioral health concerns, and low literacy
and numeracy skills are also factors (135).
The prevalence of diabetes among people
experiencing housing insecurity is estimated to be around 8% (137). Additionally, people with diabetes and housing
insecurity need secure places to keep
their diabetes medications and supplies
as well as refrigerator access to safely
store insulin. The risk for housing insecurity
can be ascertained using a brief risk assessment tool developed and validated
for use among veterans (138). Given the
potential challenges, health care professionals who care for housing-insecure individuals should be familiar with resources to
support these individuals or have access to
social workers who can facilitate stable
housing as a way to improve diabetes care
(139).

Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

S22

Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

Social Capital and Community
Support

Social capital, which comprises community and personal network instrumental
support, promotes better health, whereas
lack of social support is associated with
poorer health outcomes in individuals
with diabetes (104). Of particular concern
are the SDOH, including, among others,
racism and discrimination (155). These
factors are rarely addressed in routine
clinical practice but may be underlying
reasons for adverse health outcomes and
lower engagement in beneﬁcial self-care
behaviors and medication use. Optimally
identifying and leveraging community resources are core components of chronic
care management (15).
Health care community linkages are
receiving increasing attention from the
American Medical Association, the Agency
for Healthcare Research and Quality, and
others to promote the translation of clinical
recommendations for nutrition and physical activity in real-world settings (156).
Community health workers (CHWs) (157),
community paramedics (158), peer supporters (159,160), and lay leaders (161)
may assist in the delivery of DSMES services (119,162), particularly in underserved
communities. The American Public Health
Association deﬁnes a CHW as a “frontline
public health worker who is a trusted
member of and/or has an unusually close
understanding of the community served”

(163). CHWs can be part of an evidencebased strategy to improve the management of diabetes and cardiovascular risk
factors in underserved communities and
health care systems (164). The CHW scope
of practice in areas such as outreach and
communication, advocacy, social support,
basic health education, referrals to community clinics, and other services has successfully provided social and primary preventive
services to underserved populations in rural and hard-to-reach communities. Even
though CHWs’ core competencies are not
clinical in nature, in some circumstances,
clinicians may delegate limited clinical
tasks to CHWs. If such is the case, these
tasks must always be performed under
the direct supervision of the delegating
health professional and following state
health care laws and statutes (165,166).
Community paramedics are advanced
paramedics with training in chronic disease monitoring and education, medication management, care coordination, and
SDOH in addition to their emergency medical services expertise. While their scope of
practice varies across states, community
paramedics can engage and support people living with diabetes under the direction
of a medical director by delivering diabetes education, assisting with medication
management, performing health assessments and wound care, and connecting
people with diabetes and care partners
with clinical and community resources
(158).
SUMMARY

Improving individual and population health
for people with and at risk for diabetes requires engagement of and collaboration
between people with diabetes and their
caregivers, interprofessional health care
teams, health systems, community partners, payors, policymakers, and public
health agencies. This section provides
guidance to facilitate implementation of
evidence-based diabetes care recommendations that are discussed in the Standards of Care with the goal of improving
health, eliminating health disparities, and
reducing the impact of diabetes and its
complications on individuals and society.
References
1. Silberberg M, Martinez-Bianchi V, Lyn MJ. What
is population health? Prim Care 2019;46:475–484
2. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on
Quality of Health Care in America. Crossing the
Quality Chasm: A New Health System for the 21st

Century. Washington, DC, National Academies
Press, 2001. Available from https://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25057539
3. Haire-Joshu D, Hill-Briggs F. The next generation
of diabetes translation: a path to health equity.
Annu Rev Public Health 2019;40:391–410
4. Ebekozien O, Mungmode A, Sanchez J, et al.
Longitudinal trends in glycemic outcomes and
technology use for over 48,000 people with type 1
diabetes (2016-2022) from the T1D Exchange
Quality Improvement Collaborative. Diabetes
Technol Ther 2023;25:765–773
5. Fang M, Wang D, Coresh J, Selvin E. Trends in
diabetes treatment and control in U.S. adults,
1999-2018. N Engl J Med 2021;384:2219–2228
6. Kerr EA, Heisler M, Krein SL, et al. Beyond
comorbidity counts: how do comorbidity type and
severity inﬂuence diabetes patients’ treatment
priorities and self-management? J Gen Intern Med
2007;22:1635–1640
7. Fernandez A, Schillinger D, Warton EM, et al.
Language barriers, physician-patient language concordance, and glycemic control among insured
Latinos with diabetes: the Diabetes Study of
Northern California (DISTANCE). J Gen Intern Med
2011;26:170–176
8. TRIAD Study Group. Health systems, patients
factors, and quality of care for diabetes: a synthesis
of ﬁndings from the TRIAD study. Diabetes Care
2010;33:940–947
9. Malik FS, Sauder KA, Isom S, et al. Trends in
glycemic control among youth and young adults
with diabetes: the SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth
study. Diabetes Care 2022;45:285–294
10. Foster NC, Beck RW, Miller KM, et al. State of
type 1 diabetes management and outcomes
from the T1D Exchange in 2016-2018. Diabetes
Technol Ther 2019;21:66–72
11. Parker ED, Lin J, Mahoney T, et al. Economic
costs of diabetes in the U.S. in 2022. Diabetes
Care 2024;47:26–43
12. Patel MR, Zhang G, Heisler M, et al.
Measurement and validation of the comprehensive
score for ﬁnancial toxicity (COST) in a population
with diabetes. Diabetes Care 2022;45:2535–2543
13. Prahalad P, Hardison H, Odugbesan O, et al.;
T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative.
Benchmarking diabetes technology use among
21 U.S. pediatric diabetes centers. Clin Diabetes
2024;42:27–33
14. Chehal PK, Selvin E, DeVoe JE, Mangione CM,
Ali MK. Diabetes and the fragmented state of US
health care and policy. Health Aff (Millwood)
2022;41:939–946
15. Stellefson M, Dipnarine K, Stopka C. The
chronic care model and diabetes management in
US primary care settings: a systematic review.
Prev Chronic Dis 2013;10:E26
16. Goh LH, Siah CJR, Tam WWS, Tai ES, Young
DYL. Effectiveness of the chronic care model for
adults with type 2 diabetes in primary care: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Syst Rev
2022;11:273
17. Tricco AC, Ivers NM, Grimshaw JM, et al.
Effectiveness of quality improvement strategies
on the management of diabetes: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. Lancet 2012;379:
2252–2261
18. Konnyu KJ, Yogasingam S, Lepine J, et al.
Quality improvement strategies for diabetes
care: Effects on outcomes for adults living with

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S14/791468/dc25s001.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

applied health numeracy, and interpretive
health numeracy, which is especially important for people using diabetes technologies
like insulin pumps (152). An emotional
component also affects a person’s ability to
understand concepts of risk, probability,
and communication of scientiﬁc evidence
(153). People with prediabetes or diabetes
often need to perform numeric tasks such
as interpreting food labels and blood glucose levels to make treatment decisions.
Thus, both health literacy and numeracy
are necessary for enabling effective communication between people with diabetes and health professionals, arriving at
a treatment plan, and making diabetes
self-management task decisions. If people
with diabetes appear not to understand
concepts associated with treatment decisions, both can be assessed using standardized screening measures (154). Adjunctive
education and support may be indicated if
limited health literacy and numeracy are
barriers to optimal care decisions (60).

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

diabetesjournals.org/care

33. Gunter KE, Peek ME, Tanumihardjo JP, et al.
Population health innovations and payment
to address social needs among patients and
communities with diabetes. Milbank Q 2021;99:
928–973
34. Katula JA, Dressler EV, Kittel CA, et al. Effects
of a digital diabetes prevention program: an RCT.
Am J Prev Med 2022;62:567–577
35. Eberle C, Stichling S. Clinical improvements
by telemedicine interventions managing type 1
and type 2 diabetes: systematic meta-review. J
Med Internet Res 2021;23:e23244
36. American Telemedicine Association. Telehealth:
Deﬁning 21st Century Care. Accessed 26 July 2024.
Available from https://www.americantelemed.org/
resource/why-telemedicine/
37. Telligen and gpTRAC (Great Plains Telehealth
Resource & Assistance Center). Telehealth StartUp
and Resource Guide Version 1.1. Accessed 26 July
2024. Available from https://www.healthit.gov/
sites/default/ﬁles/telehealthguide_ﬁnal_0.pdf
38. American Medical Association. AMA Telehealth
Quick Guide. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from
https://www.ama-assn.org/practice-management/
digital/ama-telehealth-quick-guide
39. Zupa MF, Vimalananda VG, Rothenberger
SD, et al. Patterns of telemedicine use and
glycemic outcomes of endocrinology care for
patients with type 2 diabetes. JAMA Netw Open
2023;6:e2346305
40. Mullur RS, Hsiao JS, Mueller K. Telemedicine
in diabetes care. Am Fam Physician 2022;105:
281–288
41. Crowley MJ, Tarkington PE, Bosworth HB,
et al. Effect of a comprehensive telehealth
intervention vs telemonitoring and care coordination in patients with persistently poor type 2
diabetes control: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA
Intern Med 2022;182:943–952
42. Xu T, Pujara S, Sutton S, Rhee M. Telemedicine in the management of type 1 diabetes.
Prev Chronic Dis 2018;15:E13
43. Kobe EA, Lewinski AA, Jeffreys AS, et al.
Implementation of an intensive telehealth intervention for rural patients with clinic-refractory
diabetes. J Gen Intern Med 2022;37:3080–3088
44. Heitkemper EM, Mamykina L, Travers J,
Smaldone A. Do health information technology
self-management interventions improve glycemic
control in medically underserved adults with
diabetes? A systematic review and meta-analysis.
J Am Med Inform Assoc 2017;24:1024–1035
45. Jarvandi S, Roberson P, Greig J, Upendram S,
Grion J. Effectiveness of diabetes education
interventions in rural America: a systematic
review. Health Educ Res 2023;38:286–305
46. Moschonis G, Siopis G, Jung J, et al.;
DigiCare4You Consortium. Effectiveness, reach,
uptake, and feasibility of digital health interventions
for adults with type 2 diabetes: a systematic review
and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials.
Lancet Digit Health 2023;5:e125–e143
47. Timpel P, Oswald S, Schwarz PEH, Harst L.
Mapping the evidence on the effectiveness of
telemedicine interventions in diabetes, dyslipidemia,
and hypertension: an umbrella review of systematic
reviews and meta-analyses. J Med Internet Res
2020;22:e16791
48. Faruque LI, Wiebe N, Ehteshami-Afshar A,
et al.; Alberta Kidney Disease Network. Effect
of telemedicine on glycated hemoglobin in

diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis
of randomized trials. CMAJ 2017;189:E341–E364
49. Reagan L, Pereira K, Jefferson V, et al.
Diabetes self-management training in a virtual
environment. Diabetes Educ 2017;43:413–421
50. Zhang K, Huang Q, Wang Q, et al. Telemedicine in improving glycemic control among
children and adolescents with type 1 diabetes
mellitus: systematic review and meta-analysis. J
Med Internet Res 2024;26:e51538
51. Garcia JF, Fogel J, Reid M, Bisno DI, Raymond
JK. Telehealth for young adults with diabetes:
addressing social determinants of health. Diabetes
Spectr 2021;34:357–362
52. Khalid A, Dong Q, Chuluunbaatar E, Haldane
V, Durrani H, Wei X. Implementation science
perspectives on implementing telemedicine interventions for hypertension or diabetes management: scoping review. J Med Internet Res 2023;
25:e42134
53. Schmittdiel JA, Gopalan A, Lin MW, Banerjee
S, Chau CV, Adams AS. Population health
management for diabetes: health care systemlevel approaches for improving quality and
addressing disparities. Curr Diab Rep 2017;17:31
54. Peterson KA, Carlin CS, Solberg LI, Normington J, Lock EF. Care management processes
important for high-quality diabetes care. Diabetes Care 2023;46:1762–1769
55. Raebel MA, Schmittdiel J, Karter AJ, Konieczny
JL, Steiner JF. Standardizing terminology and
deﬁnitions of medication adherence and persistence in research employing electronic databases. Med Care 2013;51:S11–S21
56. Feifer C, Nemeth L, Nietert PJ, et al. Different
paths to high-quality care: three archetypes of
top-performing practice sites. Ann Fam Med
2007;5:233–241
57. Mungmode A, Noor N, Weinstock RS, et al.
Making diabetes electronic medical record data
actionable: promoting benchmarking and population health improvement using the T1D
Exchange Quality Improvement Portal. Clin
Diabetes 2022;41:45–55
58. Powell RE, Zaccardi F, Beebe C, et al. Strategies
for overcoming therapeutic inertia in type 2
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Diabetes Obes Metab 2021;23:2137–2154
59. Herges JR, Neumiller JJ, McCoy RG. Easing
the ﬁnancial burden of diabetes management: a
guide for patients and primary care clinicians.
Clin Diabetes 2021;39:427–436
60. Young-Hyman D, de Groot M, Hill-Briggs F,
Gonzalez JS, Hood K, Peyrot M. Psychosocial care
for people with diabetes: a position statement of
the American Diabetes Association. Diabetes
Care 2016;39:2126–2140
61. Davis J, Fischl AH, Beck J, et al. 2022 National
standards for diabetes self-management education
and support. Diabetes Care 2022;45:484–494
62. Pullen-Smith B, Carter-Edwards L, Leathers
KH. Community health ambassadors: a model for
engaging community leaders to promote better
health in North Carolina. J Public Health Manag
Pract 2008;14(Suppl):S73–S81
63. Tanhapour M, Peimani M, Rostam Niakan
Kalhori S, et al. The effect of personalized
intelligent digital systems for self-care training on
type II diabetes: a systematic review and metaanalysis of clinical trials. Acta Diabetol 2023;60:
1599–1631

S23

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S14/791468/dc25s001.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

diabetes. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2023;5:
CD014513
19. Herges JR, Matulis JC, Kessler ME,
Ruehmann LL, Mara KC, McCoy RG. Evaluation of
an enhanced primary care team model to
improve diabetes care. Ann Fam Med 2022;20:
505–511
20. Levengood TW, Peng Y, Xiong KZ, et al.;
Community Preventive Services Task Force. Teambased care to improve diabetes management: a
community guide meta-analysis. Am J Prev Med
2019;57:e17–e26
21. Fortmann AL, Walker C, Barger K, et al. Care
team integration in primary care improves oneyear clinical and ﬁnancial outcomes in diabetes: a
case for value-based care. Popul Health Manag
2020;23:467–475
22. Zupa MF, Arena VC, Johnson PA, Thearle MB,
Siminerio LM. A coordinated population health
approach to diabetes education in primary care.
Diabetes Educ 2019;45:580–585
23. Lee JK, McCutcheon LRM, Fazel MT, Cooley
JH, Slack MK. Assessment of interprofessional
collaborative practices and outcomes in adults
with diabetes and hypertension in primary care:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA
Netw Open 2021;4:e2036725
24. Eisenstat SA, Chang Y, Porneala BC, et al.
Development and implementation of a collaborative
team care model for effective insulin use in an
academic medical center primary care network. Am
J Med Qual 2017;32:397–405
25. Li M, Tang H, Liu X. Primary care team and
its association with quality of care for people
with multimorbidity: a systematic review. BMC
Prim Care 2023;24:20
26. Adler-Milstein J, Linden A, Hollingsworth JM,
Ryan AM. Association of primary care engagement
in value-based reform programs with health
services outcomes: participation and synergies.
JAMA Health Forum 2022;3:e220005
27. Bojadzievski T, Gabbay RA. Patient-centered
medical home and diabetes. Diabetes Care 2011;
34:1047–1053
28. McManus LS, Dominguez-Cancino KA,
Stanek MK, et al. The patient-centered medical
home as an intervention strategy for diabetes
mellitus: a systematic review of the literature.
Curr Diabetes Rev 2021;17:317–331
29. Fraze TK, Lewis VA, Tierney E, Colla CH.
Quality of care improves for patients with
diabetes in medicare shared savings accountable
care organizations: organizational characteristics
associated with performance. Popul Health
Manag 2018;21:401–408
30. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Accountable Health Communities Model.
Accessed 15 August 2024. Available from https://
www.cms.gov/priorities/innovation/innovationmodels/ahcm
31. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Accountable Health Communities (AHC) Model
Evaluation: Second Evaluation Report. Accessed
15 August 2024. Available from https://www.cms.
gov/priorities/innovation/data-and-reports/2023/
ahc-second-eval-rpt
32. Wang S, Weyer G, Duru OK, Gabbay RA,
Huang ES. Can alternative payment models and
value-based insurance design alter the course of
diabetes in the United States? Health Aff (Millwood)
2022;41:980–984

Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

S24

Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

patients with diabetes in the US. JAMA Health
Forum 2021;2:e214182
79. Essien UR, Singh B, Swabe G, et al. Association
of prescription co-payment with adherence to
glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist and
sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitor therapies
in patients with heart failure and diabetes. JAMA
Netw Open 2023;6:e2316290
80. Galindo RJ, Uppal TS, McCoy RG, Umpierrez
GE, Ali MK. Use and continuity of weight-modifying
medications among adults with diabetes and
overweight/obesity: US population study. Obesity
(Silver Spring) 2023;31:2924–2935
81. Taylor SI. The high cost of diabetes drugs:
disparate impact on the most vulnerable patients.
Diabetes Care 2020;43:2330–2332
82. Taha MB, Valero-Elizondo J, Yahya T, et al.
Cost-related medication nonadherence in adults
with diabetes in the united states: the National
Health Interview Survey 2013-2018. Diabetes
Care 2022;45:594–603
83. Myerson R, Laiteerapong N. The Affordable
Care Act and diabetes diagnosis and care:
exploring the potential impacts. Curr Diab Rep
2016;16:27
84. Ofﬁce of the Assistant Secretary for Planning
and Evaluation. Health Coverage Changes Under
the Affordable Care Act: End of 2021 Update.
2022. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from
https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/health-coveragechanges-2021-update
85. Casagrande SS, McEwen LN, Herman WH.
Changes in health insurance coverage under the
Affordable Care Act: a national sample of U.S.
adults with diabetes, 2009 and 2016. Diabetes
Care 2018;41:956–962
86. Doucette ED, Salas J, Scherrer JF. Insurance
coverage and diabetes quality indicators among
patients in NHANES. Am J Manag Care 2016;22:
484–490
87. Kaiser Family Foundation. 2021 Employer
Health Beneﬁts Survey. Accessed 26 July 2024.
Available from https://www.kff.org/report-section/
ehbs-2021-summary-of-ﬁndings/
88. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Employee
Beneﬁts. High Deductible Health Plans and Health
Savings Accounts. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available
from https://www.bls.gov/ebs/factsheets/highdeductible-health-plans-and-health-savings-accounts
.htm
89. Garabedian LF, Zhang F, LeCates R, Wallace
J, Ross-Degnan D, Wharam JF. Trends in high
deductible health plan enrolment and spending
among commercially insured members with and
without chronic conditions: a Natural Experiment
for Translation in Diabetes (NEXT-D2) study. BMJ
Open 2021;11:e044198
90. Wu YM, Huang J, Reed ME. Association
between high-deductible health plans and
engagement in routine medical care for type 2
diabetes in a privately insured population: a
propensity score-matched study. Diabetes Care
2022;45:1193–1200
91. Jiang DH, Herrin J, Van Houten HK, McCoy RG.
Evaluation of high-deductible health plans and
acute glycemic complications among adults with
diabetes. JAMA Netw Open 2023;6:e2250602
92. McCoy RG, Swarna KS, Jiang DH, et al.
Enrollment in high-deductible health plans and
incident diabetes complications. JAMA Netw
Open 2024;7:e243394

93. Gibson DM. Estimates of the percentage of
US adults with diabetes who could be screened
for diabetic retinopathy in primary care settings.
JAMA Ophthalmol 2019;137:440–444
94. Kahkoska AR, Busby-Whitehead J, Jonsson
Funk M, et al. Receipt of diabetes specialty care
and management services by older adults with
diabetes in the U.S., 2015–2019: an analysis of
Medicare fee-for-service claims. Diabetes Care
2024;47:1181–1185
95. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
The National Quality Strategy: Fact Sheet.
Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from https://
www.ahrq.gov/workingforquality/about/nqs-factsheets/nqs-fact-sheet-0214.html
96. Odugbesan O, Mungmode A, Rioles N, et al.;
T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative.
Increasing continuous glucose monitoring use for
non-Hispanic Black and Hispanic people with type 1
diabetes: results from the T1D Exchange Quality
Improvement Collaborative Equity Study. Clin
Diabetes 2024;42:40–48
97. Odugbesan O, Wright T, Jones N-HY, et al.;
T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative.
Increasing social determinants of health screening
rates among six endocrinology centers across the
United States: results from the T1D Exchange
Quality Improvement Collaborative. Clin Diabetes
2024;42:49–55
98. Prahalad P, Ebekozien O, Alonso GT, et al.;
T1D Exchange Quality Improvement Collaborative
Study Group. Multi-clinic quality improvement
initiative increases continuous glucose monitoring
use among adolescents and young adults with
type 1 diabetes. Clin Diabetes 2021;39:264–271
99. Bratke H, Biringer E, Ushakova A, et al. Ten
years of improving glycemic control in pediatric
diabetes care: data from the Norwegian Childhood
Diabetes Registry. Diabetes Care 2024;47:1122–
1130
100. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK). Diabetes for Health
Professionals. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from
https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/
professionals/clinical-tools-patient-management/
diabetes
101. O’Connor PJ, Sperl-Hillen JM, Fazio CJ,
Averbeck BM, Rank BH, Margolis KL. Outpatient
diabetes clinical decision support: current status and
future directions. Diabet Med 2016;33:734–741
102. Rosenthal MB, Cutler DM, Feder J. The ACO
rules–striking the balance between participation
and transformative potential. N Engl J Med
2011;365:e6
103. Washington AE, Lipstein SH. The PatientCentered Outcomes Research Institute–promoting
better information, decisions, and health. N Engl J
Med 2011;365:e31
104. Hill-Briggs F, Adler NE, Berkowitz SA, et al.
Social determinants of health and diabetes: a
scientiﬁc review. Diabetes Care 2020;44:258–279
105. Zakaria NI, Tehranifar P, Laferrere B,
Albrecht SS. Racial and ethnic disparities in
glycemic control among insured US adults. JAMA
Netw Open 2023;6:e2336307
106. Patel MR, Piette JD, Resnicow K, KowalskiDobson T, Heisler M. Social determinants of
health, cost-related nonadherence, and costreducing behaviors among adults with diabetes:
ﬁndings from the National Health Interview
Survey. Med Care 2016;54:796–803

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S14/791468/dc25s001.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

64. Gaffney A, Himmelstein DU, Woolhandler S.
Prevalence and correlates of patient rationing of
insulin in the United States: a national survey.
Ann Intern Med 2022;175:1623–1626
65. Cefalu WT, Dawes DE, Gavlak G, et al.;
Insulin Access and Affordability Working Group.
Insulin Access and Affordability Working Group:
conclusions and recommendations. Diabetes Care
2018;41:1299–1311
66. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Part D Senior Savings Model. Accessed 26 July
2024. Available from https://www.cms.gov/
priorities/innovation/innovation-models/part-dsavings-model
67. Baig K, Dusetzina SB. Premiums and out-ofpocket spending for long-acting insulins under
the Medicare Part D Senior Savings Model. JAMA
2022;328:2161–2162
68. American Diabetes Association. State Insulin
Copay Caps. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from
https://diabetes.org/tools-resources/affordableinsulin/state-insulin-copay-caps
69. Suran M. All 3 major insulin manufacturers
are cutting their prices–here’s what the news
means for patients with diabetes. JAMA 2023;329:
1337–1339
70. American Diabetes Association. Insulin Cost
and Affordability. Leading the Fight for Insulin
Affordability. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available
from https://diabetes.org/tools-support/insulinaffordability
71. McCoy RG, Van Houten HK, Karaca-Mandic
P, Ross JS, Montori VM, Shah ND. Second-line
therapy for type 2 diabetes management: the
treatment/beneﬁt paradox of cardiovascular and
kidney comorbidities. Diabetes Care 2021;44:2302–
2311
72. McCoy RG, Van Houten HK, Deng Y, et al.
Comparison of diabetes medications used by
adults with commercial insurance vs Medicare
Advantage, 2016 to 2019. JAMA Netw Open
2021;4:e2035792
73. Benning TJ, Heien HC, Herges JR, Creo AL, Al
Nofal A, McCoy RG. Glucagon ﬁll rates and cost
among children and adolescents with type 1
diabetes in the United States, 2011-2021. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 2023;206:111026
74. Herges JR, Haag JD, Kosloski-Tarpenning KA,
Mara KC, McCoy RG. Gaps in glucagon ﬁlls
among commercially insured patients receiving a
glucagon prescription. Diabetes Res Clin Pract
2023;200:110720
75. Tilden DR, French B, Datye KA, Jaser SS.
Disparities in continuous glucose monitor use
between children with type 1 diabetes living in
urban and rural areas. Diabetes Care 2024;47:
346–352
76. Patel PM, Thomas D, Liu Z, Aldrich-Renner S,
Clemons M, Patel BV. Systematic review of
disparities in continuous glucose monitoring and
insulin pump utilization in the United States: key
themes and evidentiary gaps. Diabetes Obes
Metab 2024;26:4293–4301
77. Eberly LA, Yang L, Eneanya ND, et al.
Association of race/ethnicity, gender, and socioeconomic status with sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor use among patients with
diabetes in the US. JAMA Netw Open 2021;4:
e216139
78. Eberly LA, Yang L, Essien UR, et al. Racial,
ethnic, and socioeconomic inequities in glucagonlike peptide-1 receptor agonist use among

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

diabetesjournals.org/care

2024. Available from https://www.cms.gov/ﬁles/
document/ehrdecisiontable062816pdf
121. Hershey JA, Morone J, Lipman TH, Hawkes
CP. Social determinants of health, goals and
outcomes in high-risk children with type 1
diabetes. Can J Diabetes 2021;45:444–450.e441
122. Walker RJ, Strom Williams J, Egede LE.
Inﬂuence of race, ethnicity and social determinants
of health on diabetes outcomes. Am J Med Sci
2016;351:366–373
123. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Maryland Total Cost of Care Model. Accessed 26
July 2024. Available from https://www.cms.gov/
priorities/innovation/innovation-models/md-tccm
124. Huang ES. Management of diabetes mellitus
in older people with comorbidities. BMJ 2016;353:
i2200
125. O’Gurek DT, Henke C. A practical approach
to screening for social determinants of health.
Fam Pract Manag 2018;25:7–12
126. Yan AF, Chen Z, Wang Y, et al. Effectiveness
of social needs screening and interventions in
clinical settings on utilization, cost, and clinical
outcomes: a systematic review. Health Equity
2022;6:454–475
127. Rabbitt MP, Hales LJ, Burke MP, ColemanJensen A. Household Food Security in the United
States in 2022 (Report No. ERR-325). U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Economic Research
Service. Accessed 22 August 2024. Available from
https://search.nal.usda.gov/discovery/fulldisplay?
context=L&vid=01NAL_INST:MAIN&docid=alma9916411232407426
128. Kirby JB, Bernard D, Liang L. The prevalence
of food insecurity is highest among americans for
whom diet is most critical to health. Diabetes
Care 2021;44:e131–e132
129. Alawode O, Humble S, Herrick CJ. Food
insecurity, SNAP participation and glycemic
control in low-income adults with predominantly
type 2 diabetes: a cross-sectional analysis using
NHANES 2007-2018 data. BMJ Open Diabetes
Res Care 2023;11:e003205
130. Schroeder EB, Zeng C, Sterrett AT, Kimpo
TK, Paolino AR, Steiner JF. The longitudinal
relationship between food insecurity in older
adults with diabetes and emergency department
visits, hospitalizations, hemoglobin A1c, and
medication adherence. J Diabetes Complications
2019;33:289–295
131. Hager ER, Quigg AM, Black MM, et al.
Development and validity of a 2-item screen to
identify families at risk for food insecurity.
Pediatrics 2010;126:e26-32–e32
132. Little M, Rosa E, Heasley C, Asif A, Dodd W,
Richter A. Promoting healthy food access and
nutrition in primary care: a systematic scoping
review of food prescription programs. Am J
Health Promot 2022;36:518–536
133. Berkowitz SA, Meigs JB, DeWalt D, et al.
Material need insecurities, control of diabetes
mellitus, and use of health care resources: results
of the Measuring Economic Insecurity in Diabetes
study. JAMA Intern Med 2015;175:257–265
134. Reid LA, Mendoza JA, Merchant AT, et al.
Household food insecurity is associated with
diabetic ketoacidosis but not severe hypoglycemia
or glycemic control in youth and young adults with
youth-onset type 2 diabetes. Pediatr Diabetes
2022;23:982–990
135. White BM, Logan A, Magwood GS. Access
to diabetes care for populations experiencing

homelessness: an integrated review. Curr Diab
Rep 2016;16:112
136. Stahre M, VanEenwyk J, Siegel P, Njai R.
Housing insecurity and the association with
health outcomes and unhealthy behaviors,
Washington State, 2011. Prev Chronic Dis 2015;
12:E109
137. Bernstein RS, Meurer LN, Plumb EJ, Jackson
JL. Diabetes and hypertension prevalence in
homeless adults in the United States: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Public
Health 2015;105:e46–e60
138. Montgomery AE, Fargo JD, Kane V, Culhane
DP. Development and validation of an instrument
to assess imminent risk of homelessness among
veterans. Public Health Rep 2014;129:428–436
139. Baxter AJ, Tweed EJ, Katikireddi SV, Thomson
H. Effects of Housing First approaches on health
and well-being of adults who are homeless or at
risk of homelessness: systematic review and metaanalysis of randomised controlled trials. J Epidemiol
Community Health 2019;73:379–387
140. Al-Rousan T, AlHeresh R, Saadi A, et al.
Epidemiology of cardiovascular disease and its
risk factors among refugees and asylum seekers:
systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol
Cardiovasc Risk Prev 2022;12:200126
141. Jaung MS, Willis R, Sharma P, et al. Models
of care for patients with hypertension and
diabetes in humanitarian crises: a systematic
review. Health Policy Plan 2021;36:509–532
142. Olson RM, Nolan CP, Limaye N, Osei M,
Palazuelos D. National prevalence of diabetes
and barriers to care among U.S. farmworkers and
association with migrant worker status. Diabetes
Care 2023;46:2188–2192
143. U.S. Department of Agriculture, National
Agricultural Statistics Service. Census of Agriculture.
2022 Census Full Report. Accessed 26 July 2024.
Available from https://www.nass.usda.gov/
Publications/AgCensus/2022/index.php#full_report
144. Soto S, Yoder AM, Aceves B, Nu~
no T,
Sepulveda R, Rosales CB. Determining regional
differences in barriers to accessing health care
among farmworkers using the National Agricultural Workers Survey. J Immigr Minor Health
2023;25:324–330
145. U.S. Department of Health & Human
Services. National Standards for Culturally and
Linguistically Appropriate Services (CLAS) in
Health and Health Care. Accessed 26 July 2024.
Available from https://thinkculturalhealth.hhs.
gov/assets/pdfs/EnhancedNationalCLASStandards.
pdf
146. Centers for Disease Control. Talking Points
About Health Literacy. Accessed 26 July 2024.
Available from https://www.cdc.gov/healthliteracy/
shareinteract/TellOthers.html
147. Nutbeam D, Lloyd JE. Understanding and
responding to health literacy as a social
determinant of health. Annu Rev Public Health
2021;42:159–173
148. Marciano L, Camerini A-L, Schulz PJ. The
role of health literacy in diabetes knowledge,
self-care, and glycemic control: a meta-analysis. J
Gen Intern Med 2019;34:1007–1017
149. Schafﬂer J, Leung K, Tremblay S, et al. The
effectiveness of self-management interventions
for individuals with low health literacy and/or
low income: a descriptive systematic review. J
Gen Intern Med 2018;33:510–523

S25

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S14/791468/dc25s001.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

107. Commission on Social Determinants of
Health, World Health Organization. Closing the
Gap in a Generation: Health Equity Through
Action on the Social Determinants of Health.
2008. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHOIER-CSDH-08.1
108. Dixon B, Pe~
na M-M, Taveras EM. Lifecourse
approach to racial/ethnic disparities in childhood
obesity. Adv Nutr 2012;3:73–82
109. Egede LE, Walker RJ, Linde S, et al.
Nonmedical interventions for type 2 diabetes:
evidence, actionable strategies, and policy
opportunities. Health Aff (Millwood) 2022;41:
963–970
110. Jiang DH, O’Connor PJ, Huguet N, Golden
SH, McCoy RG. Modernizing diabetes care quality
measures. Health Aff (Millwood) 2022;41:955–
962
111. Joint Commission. R3 Report. Requirement,
Rationale, Reference. Accessed 22 August 2024.
Available from https://www.jointcommission.org/-/
media/tjc/documents/standards/r3-reports/r3_
disparities_july2022-6-20-2022.pdf
112. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
CMS Framework for Health Equity 2022–2032.
Accessed 15 August 2024. Available from https://
www.cms.gov/ﬁles/document/cms-frameworkhealth-equity-2022.pdf
113. National Committee for Quality Assurance.
Healthcare Effectiveness Data and Information
Set (HEDIS-MY) 2024. Accessed 15 August 2024.
Available from https://www.ncqa.org/wpcontent/uploads/HEDIS-MY-2024-MeasureDescription.pdf
114. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Quality Payment Program. Explore Measures &
Activities. Accessed 15 August 2024. Available
from https://qpp.cms.gov/mips/explore-measures
115. Ebekozien O, Mungmode A, Buckingham D,
et al. Achieving equity in diabetes research:
borrowing from the ﬁeld of quality improvement
using a practical framework and improvement
tools. Diabetes Spectr 2022;35:304–312
116. Odugbesan O, Addala A, Nelson G, et al.
Implicit racial-ethnic and insurance-mediated
bias to recommending diabetes technology:
insights from T1D Exchange Multicenter Pediatric
and Adult Diabetes Provider Cohort. Diabetes
Technol Ther 2022;24:619–627
117. Ebekozien O, Fantasia K, Farrokhi F,
Sabharwal A, Kerr D. Technology and health
inequities in diabetes care: how do we widen
access to underserved populations and utilize
technology to improve outcomes for all? Diabetes
Obes Metab 2024;26 Suppl 1:3–13
118. U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. Secretary’s Advisory Committee on
National Health Promotion and Disease Prevention
Objectives for 2030. Accessed 26 July 2024.
Available from https://health.gov/our-work/
national-health-initiatives/healthy-people/healthypeople-2030/secretarys-advisory-committee-2030
119. National Academy of Sciences. A Framework
for Educating Health Professionals to Address the
Social Determinants of Health. 2016. Accessed 26
July 2024. Available from https://www.ncbi.nlm
.nih.gov/pubmed/27854400
120. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.
Ensuring Proper Use of Electronic Health Record
Features and Capabilities. 2016. Accessed 26 July

Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

S26

Improving Care and Promoting Health in Populations

157. Evans J, White P, Ha H. Evaluating the
effectiveness of community health worker
interventions on glycaemic control in type 2
diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Lancet 2023;402(Suppl 1):S40
158. Kasper AL, Myers LA, Carlson PN, et al.
Diabetes management for community paramedics:
development and implementation of a novel
curriculum. Diabetes Spectr 2022;35:367–376
159. Azmiardi A, Murti B, Febrinasari RP,
Tamtomo DG. The effect of peer support in
diabetes self-management education on glycemic
control in patients with type 2 diabetes: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Epidemiol
Health 2021;43:e2021090
160. Fisher EB, Boothroyd RI, Elstad EA, et al.
Peer support of complex health behaviors in
prevention and disease management with special
reference to diabetes: systematic reviews. Clin
Diabetes Endocrinol 2017;3:4
161. Foster G, Taylor SJC, Eldridge SE, Ramsay J,
Grifﬁths CJ. Self-management education programmes by lay leaders for people with chronic
conditions. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007:
Cd005108
162. Piatt GA, Rodgers EA, Xue L, Zgibor JC.
Integration and utilization of peer leaders for
diabetes self-management support: results from

Project SEED (Support, Education, and Evaluation
in Diabetes). Diabetes Educ 2018;44:373–382
163. Rosenthal EL, Rush CH, Allen CG.
Understanding Scope and Competencies: A
Contemporary Look at the United States
Community Health Worker Field: Progress
Report of the Community Health Worker
(CHW) Core Consensus (C3) Project: Building
National Consensus on CHW Core Roles, Skills, and
Qualities. 2016. Accessed 26 July 2024. Available
from https://ﬁles.ctctcdn.com/a907c850501/
1c1289f0-88cc-49c3-a238-66def942c147.pdf
164. Guide to Community Preventive Services.
Community health workers help patients
manage diabetes. Updated 25 October 2022.
Accessed 26 July 2024. Available from https://
www.thecommunityguide.org/content/communityhealth-workers-help-patients-manage-diabetes
165. Cuellar AE, Calonge BN. The Community
Preventive Services Task Force: 25 years of
effectiveness, economics, and equity. Am J Prev
Med 2022;62:e371–e373
166. The Network for Public Health Law. Legal
Considerations for Community Health Workers
and Their Employers. Accessed 22 August 2024.
Available from https://www.networkforphl.org/
resources/legal-considerations-for-communityhealth-workers-and-their-employers/

Downloaded from http://diabetesjournals.org/care/article-pdf/48/Supplement_1/S14/791468/dc25s001.pdf by guest on 04 May 2026

150. Butayeva J, Ratan ZA, Downie S, Hosseinzadeh
H. The impact of health literacy interventions on
glycemic control and self-management outcomes
among type 2 diabetes mellitus: a systematic review.
J Diabetes 2023;15:724–735
151. Baumeister A, Aldin A, Chakraverty D, et al.
Interventions for improving health literacy in
migrants. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2023;11:
CD013303
152. Turrin KB, Trujillo JM. Effects of diabetes
numeracy on glycemic control and diabetes selfmanagement behaviors in patients on insulin
pump therapy. Diabetes Ther 2019;10:1337–1346
153. Schapira MM, Fletcher KE, Gilligan MA,
et al. A framework for health numeracy: how
patients use quantitative skills in health care. J
Health Commun 2008;13:501–517
154. Hesselink G, Cheng J, Schoon Y. A systematic
review of instruments to measure health literacy
of patients in emergency departments. Acad
Emerg Med 2022;29:890–901
155. Williams DR, Lawrence JA, Davis BA. Racism
and health: evidence and needed research. Annu
Rev Public Health 2019;40:105–125
156. Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality. Clinical-community linkages. Accessed 26
July 2024. Available from https://www.ahrq.gov/
professionals/prevention-chronic-care/improve/
community/index.html

Diabetes Care Volume 48, Supplement 1, January 2025

